












DVA
	




ACT

NURS ìNG
Essentials for Role Development








. “'



.°É):	'	È .'ï* I¢








ADVANCED
RACTICE
Essentials for Role Development




































Lucille A. Joel, EdD, APN, FAAN
                  Distinguished Professor Rutgers, fte State University of New Jersey
School of Nursing, New Brunswick–Newark, New Jersey

F.A. Davis Company 1915 Arch Street Philadelphia, PA 19103 www.fadavis.com

Copyright © 2022 by F.A. Davis Company

Copyright © 2022 by F.A. Davis Company. All rights reserved. ftis book is protected by copyright. No part of it may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.

Printed in the United States of America

Last digit indicates print number: 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Publisher: Susan Rhyner
Senior Content Project Manager: Amy M. Romano
Design and Illustration Manager: Carolyn O’Brien

As new scientific information becomes available through basic and clinical research, recommended treatments and drug therapies undergo changes. fte author(s) and publisher have done everything possible to make this book ac- curate, up-to-date, and in accord with accepted standards at the time of publication. fte author(s), editors, and publisher are not responsible for errors or omissions or for consequences from application of the book, and make no warranty, expressed or implied, in regard to the contents of the book. Any practice described in this book should be applied by the reader in accordance with professional standards of care used in regard to the unique circumstances that may apply in each situation. fte reader is advised always to check product information (package inserts) for changes and new information regarding dose and contraindications before administering any drug. Caution is especially urged when using new or infrequently ordered drugs.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Joel, Lucille A., editor.
Title: Advanced practice nursing : essentials for role development / [edited by] Lucille A. Joel.
Other titles: Advanced practice nursing (Joel)
Description: Fifth edition. | Philadelphia, PA : F.A. Davis Company, [2022]
| Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2021040909 (print) | LCCN 2021040910 (ebook) | ISBN 9781719642774 (paperback) | ISBN 9781719642798 (ebook)
Subjects: MESH: Advanced Practice Nursing | Nurse’s Role
Classification: LCC RT82.8 (print) | LCC RT82.8 (ebook) | NLM WY 128 | DDC 610.7306/92--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021040909
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021040910

Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is granted by F.A. Davis Company for users registered with the Copyright Clearance Center (CCC) Transactional Reporting Service, provided that the fee of $.25 per copy is paid directly to CCC, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged. fte fee code for users of the Transactional Reporting Service is: 978-0-8036-6044-1/17 + $.25.
















fte content of this text was identified only after a careful review of the documents that shape both the advanced practice nursing role and the educational programs that prepare these individuals for practice. ftat review al- lowed some decisions about topics that were essential to all advanced practice nurses (APNs),* whereas others were excluded because they are traditionally introduced during baccalaureate studies. ftis text is written for the graduate-level student in advanced practice and is in- tended to address the nonclinical aspects of the role.
   Unit 1 explores The Evolution of Advanced Practice from the historical perspective of each of the specialties: the clinical nurse-midwife (CNM), nurse anesthetist (NA), clinical nurse specialist (CNS), and nurse prac- titioner (NP). ftis historical background moves to a contemporary focus with the introduction of the many and varied hybrids of these roles that have appeared over time. ftese dramatic changes in practice have been a response to societal need. Adjustment to these changes is possible only from the kaleidoscopic view that theory allows. Skill acquisition, socialization, and adjustment to stress and strain are theoretical constructs and pro- cesses that will challenge the occupants of these roles many times over the course of a career, but coping can be taught and learned. Our accommodation to change is further challenged as we realize that advanced prac- tice is neither unique to North America nor new on the global stage. Advanced practice roles, although accom- panied by varied educational requirements and practice opportunities, are well embedded and highly respected in international culture. In the United States, education for advanced practice had become well stabilized at the

* Please note that the terms advanced practice nurse (APN) and advanced practice registered nurse (APRN) are used interchangeably in this text according to the author’s choice.

master’s degree level. ftis is no longer true. fte story of our more recent transition to doctoral preparation is laid before us with the subsequent issues this creates.
   The Practice Environment, the topic of Unit 2, dra- matically affects the care we give. With the addition of medical diagnosis and prescribing to the advanced practice repertoire, we became competitive with other disciplines, deserving the rights of reimbursement, pre- scriptive authority, clinical privileges, and participation as members on health plan panels. ftere is the further responsibility to understand budgeting and material resource management as well as the nature of different collaborative, responding, and reporting relationships. fte APN often provides care within a mediated role, working through other professionals, including nurses, to improve the human condition.
Competency in Advanced Practice, the topic of Unit 3,
demands an incisive mind capable of the highest order of critical thinking. ftis cognitive skill becomes refined as the subroles for practice emerge. fte APN is ultimately a direct caregiver, client advocate, teacher, consultant, re- searcher, and case manager. fte APN’s forte is to coach individuals and populations so that they may take con- trol of their own health in their own way, ideally even seeing chronic disease as a new trajectory of wellness. fte APN’s clients are as diverse as the many ethnicities of the U.S. public, and the challenge is often to learn from them, taking care to do no harm. fte APN’s ther- apeutic modalities go beyond traditional Western medi- cine, reaching into the realm of complementary therapies and integrative health-care practices that have become expected by many consumers. Any or all of these role competencies are potential areas for conflict, needing to be understood, managed, and resolved in the best inter- ests of the client. Some of the most pressing issues con- fronting APNs today are how to mobilize informational
v

vi	PREFACE


technology in the service of the client, securing visibility for their work, and disseminating their thinking through publication. fte chapters in this section aim to intro- duce these competencies, not to provide closure on any one topic; the art of direct care in specialty practice is not broached.
   When you have completed your course of studies, you will have many choices to make. ftere are opportunities to pursue your practice as an employee, an employer, or an independent contractor. Each holds different rights and responsibilities. Each demands Ethical, Legal, and Business Acumen, which is covered in Unit 4. Each re- quires you to prove the value you hold for your clients and for the systems in which you work. Cost efficiency and therapeutic effectiveness cannot be dismissed lightly

today. fte nuts and bolts of establishing a practice are detailed, and although these particulars apply directly to independent practice, they can be easily extrapolated to employee status. Finally, experts in the field discuss the legal and ethical dimensions of practice and how they uniquely apply to the role of the APN to ensure protec- tion for ourselves and our clients.
   ftis text has been carefully crafted based on over 40 years of experience in practice and teaching APNs. It substantially includes the nonclinical knowledge necessary to perform successfully in the APN role and raises the issues that still have to be resolved to leave this practice area better than we found it.

Lucille A. Joel

















Cindy Aiena, MBA
Executive Director of Finance Massachusetts General Hospital Boston, Massachusetts
Judith Barberio, PhD, RN-BC Pain, APNc, ANP-BC, GNP-BC
Clinical Associate Professor
Rutgers, fte State University of New Jersey School of Nursing
Newark, New Jersey
Andrea Brassard, PhD, FNP-BC, FAANP, FAAN
Associate Professor University of Maryland School of Nursing Baltimore, Maryland
Edna Cadmus, PhD, RN, NEA-BC, FAAN
Clinical Professor and Specialty Director-Nursing Leadership Program
Executive Director NJCCN
Rutgers, fte State University of New Jersey School of Nursing
Newark, New Jersey
Ann H. Cary, PhD, MPH, RN, FNAP, FAAN
Dean and Professor
Florida Gulf Coast University
College of Health and Human Services Fort Myers, Florida
Mary Ann Christopher, MSN, RN, FAAN
President/CEO
Christopher STH Consulting Avon, New Jersey

Basia Delawska- Elliott, MLIS, AHIP-S Education & Research Librarian Oregon Health & Science University
Portland, Oregon
Patricia DiFusco, MS, NP-C, FNP-BC
Nurse Practitioner
SUNY Downstate Medical Center Brooklyn, New York
Carole Ann Drick, PhD, RN, AHN-BC
Founder/Director Conscious Living Center
Past President American Holistic Nurses Association
Youngstown, Ohio
Lynne M. Dunphy, MSN, PhD, APRN, FNP-BC
Professor Emerita
Christine E. Lynn College of Nursing Florida Atlantic University
Boca Raton, Florida, and
Director of Nurse Practitioner Education Visual DX
Rochester, New York
Denise Fessler, RN, MSN
Principal/CEO Fessler and Associates
Healthcare Management Consulting, LLC Lancaster, Pennsylvania
Eileen Flaherty, RN, MBA, MPH
Staff Specialist
Massachusetts General Hospital Boston, Massachusetts































vii



Jane M. Flanagan, PhD, ANP-BC, AHN-BC, FNI, FNAP, FAAN
Associate Professor Boston College
Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts

Rita Munley Gallagher, RN, PhD
Retired Nursing and Healthcare Consultant Washington, District of Columbia

Mary Masterson Germain, EdD, ANP-BC, FNAP, D.Sc. (Hon)
Professor Emeritus
SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University [per https://www.downstate.edu/]
Brooklyn, New York

Kathleen M. Gialanella, RN, BSN, JD, LLM (Health Law & Policy)
Nurse Attorney
Kathleen M. Gialanella, Esq., P.C. Westfield, New Jersey

Shirley Girouard, RN, PhD, FAAN Professor-Nursing/Co-director GWEP/Health Policy Consultant
SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University
[per https://www.downstate.edu/] Council of State Governments-East Brooklyn, New York

Antigone Grasso, MBA
Director
Patient Care Services Management Systems and Financial Performance
Massachusetts General Hospital Boston, Massachusetts

Phyllis Shanley Hansell, EdD, RN, FNAP, FAAN
Professor
Seton Hall University College of Nursing Nutley, New Jersey

Allyssa L. Harris, RN, PhD, WHNP-BC Associate Professor and Department Chair WHNP Program Director
William F. Connell School of Nursing
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts
Joseph Jennas, CRNA, CCRN, FNYAM
Staff CRNA
NYP Columbia University Irving Medical Center New York, New York
Lucille A. Joel, APN, EdD, FAAN
Distinguished Professor
Rutgers, fte State University of New Jersey School of Nursing
New Brunswick-Newark-Blackwood, New Jersey
Dorothy A. Jones, EdD, APRN, FAAN, FNI
Professor, Senior Nurse Scientist
Boston College, Connell School of Nursing Yvonne L. Munn Center for Nursing Research Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts
David M. Keepnews, PhD, JD, RN, NEA-BC, FAAN, ANEF
Professor and Director, Health Policy DNP fte George Washington University School of
Nursing
Washington, District of Columbia
Alice F. Kuehn, RN, PhD, BC-FNP/GNP
Associate Professor Emeritus Faith Community Nurse University of Missouri-Columbia Sinclair School of Nursing Columbia, Missouri
Parish Nurse
St. Peter Catholic Church Jefferson City, Missouri
Christina Leonard, DNP, APRN, FNP-BC, CNL
Assistant Professor
Duke University School of Nursing Durham, North Carolina

CONTRIBUTORS ix


Deborah C. Messecar, PhD, MPH, RN, AGCNS-BC, CNE
Associate Professor
Oregon Health and Science University Portland, Oregon
Patricia Murphy, PhD, APN, FAAN, FPCN
Associate Professor
Rutgers, fte State University of New Jersey New Jersey Medical School
Newark, New Jersey
Marilyn H. Oermann, PhD, RN, ANEF, FAANP
ftelma M Ingles Professor of Nursing Duke University School of Nursing Durham, North Carolina
Marie-Eileen Onieal, PhD, MMHS, RN, CPNP, FAANP
Immediate Past Director, DNP Program
Rocky Mountain University of Health Professions, Provo, Utah
Past President American Association of Nurse Practitioners
Former Health Policy Coordinator, Bureau of Health Care Quality
Massachusetts Department of Public Health Boston, Massachusetts
David M. Price, MDiv., PhD
Retired faculty, New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey
Founding Faculty, PROBE, a program of CPEP Center for Personalized Education of Physicians
(CDEP)
Denver, Colorado
Beth Quatrara, DNP, RN, CMSRN, ACNS-BC
Assistant Professor
University of Virginia School of Nursing Charlottesville, Virginia
Kelly Reilly, MSN, RN, BC Director of Nursing Maimonides Medical Center
Brooklyn, New York

Valerie Sabol, PhD, ACNP-BC, GNP-BC, CNE, CHSE, ANEF, FAANP, FAAN
Division Chair, Clinical Professor Duke University School of Nursing Durham, North Carolina
Mary E. Samost, DNP,  RN, CENP Executive Director Perioperative Services Assistant Professor, DNP Program
Massachusetts General Brigham, Salem
Hospital
Salem, Massachusetts
Madrean Schober, PhD, MSN, ANP, FAANP
President
Schober Global Healthcare Consulting International
Indianapolis, Indiana

Robert Scoloveno, PhD, RN, CCRN
Director–Clinical Simulation and Associate Clinical Professor
Seton Hall University College of Nursing Nutley, New Jersey

Carrie Scotto, RN, PhD
Associate Professor
fte University of Akron College of Nursing Akron, Ohio

Dale Shaw, RN, DNP, ACNP-BC
Advanced Practice Nurse 3 University of Virginia Health System Charlottesville, Virginia

Thomas D. Smith, DNP, RN, NEA-BC, FAAN
Chief Nursing Officer and Senior Vice President Patient Care Services
Maimonides Medical Center Brooklyn, New York

Mary C. Smolenski, MS, EdD, FNP, FAANP
Writer/Editor and Consultant Lakewood Ranch, Florida



Shirley A. Smoyak, RN, PhD, FAAN
Distinguished Professor Emerita
Rutgers, fte State University of New Jersey School of Nursing
New Brunswick-Newark, New Jersey
Patricia A. Tabloski, PhD, GNP-BC, FGSA, FAAN
Associate Professor
William F. Connell School of Nursing Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
Christine A. Tanner, RN (ret), PhD, FAAN, ANEF
Professor Emerita
Oregon Health and Science University School of Nursing
Portland, Oregon

Carolyn T. Torre, RN, MA, APN, FAANP
Nursing Policy Consultant
Advisory Board Member: Felician College School of Nursing Hackensack-Meridian APN
Residency Program
NJ Mandated Health Benefits Advisory Commission Trenton Psychiatric Hospital Board of Trustees Princeton, New Jersey
Jan Towers, PhD, NP-C, CRNP (FNP), FAANP
Director of Health Policy, Federal Government, and Professional Affairs
American Academy of Nurse Practitioners Washington, District of Columbia
Maria L. Vezina, RN, EdD, NEA-BC, FAAN
System Vice President, Chief of Nursing Practice, Education, APN Credentialing and Labor Partnerships
Mount Sinai Health System New York, New York
















Phyllis Adams, EdD, APRN, FNP-C, NP-C, FAANP, FNAP
Clinical Faculty
University of Texas Health Science Center Houston, Texas
Ferrona Beason, PhD, APRN
Assistant Professor Barry University Miami Shores, Florida
Schvon Bussey, MSN, FNP-C, PMHNP-BC
Assistant Professor Albany State University Albany, Georgia
Carolynn DeSandre, PhD, APRN, CNM, FNP-BC, CSAP
Interim Dean
College of Health Sciences & Professions Institutional
University of North Georgia Dahlonega, Georgia

Joy Goins, DNP, CRNA
Clinical Coordinator and Faculty Lincoln Memorial University Harrogate, Tennessee
Cynthia Parsons, DNP, APRN, PMHNP-BC, FAANP
Associate Professor University of Tampa Tampa, Florida
Zelda Peters, DNP, FNP-C, RN
Assistant Professor, Graduate Clinical Coordinator Albany State University
Albany, Georgia
Barbara Wilder, PhD, CRNP
Director of Graduate Programs Auburn University School of Nursing Auburn, Alabama













xi



















ftis book belongs to its authors. I am proud to be one among them. Beyond that, I have been the instrument to make these written contributions accessible to today’s

students and faculty. I thank each author for the prod- ucts of his or her intellect, experience, and commitment to advanced practice.

































xiii



















Unit 1 The Evolution of Advanced Practice
1 Advanced Practice Nursing: Doing What Has to Be Done	3
Lynne M. Dunphy
2 Emerging Roles of the Advanced Practice Nurse	18
Patricia A. Tabloski
3 Role Development: A Theoretical Perspective	34
Lucille A. Joel
4 Educational Preparation of Advanced Practice Nurses: Looking to the Future	44
Phyllis Shanley Hansell
5 Global Perspectives on Advanced Practice Nursing	56
Madrean Schober

Unit 2 The Practice Environment
6 Advanced Practice Nurses
and Prescriptive Authority	105
Jan Towers
7 Credentialing and Clinical Privileges for the Advanced Practice Nurse	113
Ann H. Cary and Mary C. Smolenski
8 The Kaleidoscope of Collaborative Practice	129
Alice F. Kuehn and Patricia Murphy
9 
Participation of the Advanced Practice Nurse in Health Plans and Quality Initiatives	157
Rita Munley Gallagher
10 Public Policy and the Advanced Practice Nurse	172
Marie-Eileen Onieal
11 Resource Management	180
Cindy Aiena, Eileen Flaherty, and Antigone Grasso
12 Mediated Roles: Working With and Through Other People	200
Thomas D. Smith, Maria L. Vezina, Mary E. Samost, and Kelly Reilly

Unit 3 Competency in Advanced Practice


13 Evidence-Based Practice	221
Christine A. Tanner, Deborah C. Messecar, and Basia Delawska-Elliott
14 Advocacy and the Advanced Practice Nurse	239
Andrea Brassard
15 Case Management and Advanced Practice Nursing	249
Denise Fessler and Mary Ann Christopher
16 The Advanced Practice Nurse and Research	266
Beth Quatrara and Dale Shaw


xv

xvi	CONTENTS


17 Holism and Complementary
and Integrative Health Approaches for the Advanced Practice Nurse	277
Carole Ann Drick
18 Basic Skills for Teaching and the Advanced Practice Nurse	306
Christina Leonard, Valerie Sabol, and Marilyn H. Oermann
19 Culture as a Variable in Practice	324
Mary Masterson Germain
20 Conflict Resolution in Advanced Practice Nursing	359
David M. Price
21 Leadership for APNs: If Not Now, When?	368
Edna Cadmus
22 Information Technology
and the Advanced Practice Nurse	386
Robert Scoloveno
23 Writing for Publication	393
Shirley A. Smoyak

Unit 4 Ethical, Legal,
and Business Acumen
24 Measuring Advanced Practice Nurse Performance: Outcome Indicators, Models of Evaluation, and the Issue of Value	407
Shirley Girouard, Patricia DiFusco, and Joseph Jennas
25 
Advanced Practice Registered Nurses: Accomplishments, Trends,
and Future Directions	429
Allyssa L. Harris, Jane M. Flanagan, and Dorothy A. Jones
26 Starting a Practice and Practice Management	441
Judith Barberio
27 The Advanced Practice Nurse as Employee or Independent Contractor: Legal and Contractual Considerations	467
Kathleen M. Gialanella
28 The Law, the Courts, and the Advanced Practice Nurse	483
David M. Keepnews
29 It Can Happen to You: Malpractice
and the Advanced Practice Nurse	495
Carolyn T. Torre
30 Ethics and the Advanced Practice Nurse	511
Carrie Scotto
Index	529
Available online at fadavis.com: Bibliography

UNIT 
1
The Evolution
of Advanced Practice





























1


















Advanced Practice Nursing
Doing What Has to Be Done
Lynne M. Dunphy



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Recognize the historical role of women as healers.
• Identify the roots of professional nursing in the United States including the public health movement and turn-of-the-century settlement houses.
• Describe early innovative care models created by nurses in the first half of the
20th century such as the Frontier Nursing Service (FNS).
• Trace the trajectory of the role of the nurse midwife across the 20th century as well as the present status of this role.
• Recognize the emergence of nurse anesthetists as highly autonomous practitioners
and their contributions to the advancement of surgical techniques and develop- ments in anesthesia.
• Describe the development of the clinical nurse specialist (CNS) role in the context
of 20th-century nursing education and professional development with particular attention to the current challenges of this role.
• Describe the historical and social forces that led to the emergence of the nurse
practitioner (NP) role and understand key events in the evolution of this role.
• Describe the development of the doctor of nursing practice (DNP) and distin- guish this role from the others described in this chapter.
• Describe the current challenges to all advanced practice roles and formulate ways
to meet these challenges going forward.


3



INTRODUCTION

Advanced practice is a contemporary term that has evolved to label an old phenomenon: lay healers, usu- ally women, providing care to those in need in their surrounding communities. As Barbara Ehrenreich and Deidre English (1973) note, “Women have always been healers. ftey were the unlicensed doctors and anatomists of western history . . . they were pharmacists, cultivating herbs and exchanging the secrets of their uses. ftey were midwives, travelling from home to home and village to village” (p. 3). Today, with health care still dominated by a medical model rooted in patriarchy and white privilege, advanced practice nurses (APNs) (especially those with Doctorates of Nursing Practice [DNPs] cheeky enough to call themselves “doctor” even while clarifying their nursing role and background) are sometimes viewed as “mere” nurses “pushing the envelope”—the envelope of regulated, standardized nursing practice. fte reality is that the boundaries of professional nursing practice have always been fluid with changes in the practice setting often speeding ahead of the educational and regulatory environments. ftis phenomenon occurred again during the COVID-19 pandemic as scope-of-practice regula- tions in a number of states expanded in light of national need. It has always been those nurse healers caring for persons and families who see a need and respond—at times in concert with the medical profession and at times at odds with it—who are the true trailblazers of contemporary advanced practice nursing.
ftis chapter makes the case that, far from being a
new creation, APNs actually predate the founding of modern professional nursing. A look back into our past reveals legendary figures always responding to the chal- lenges of human need, changing the landscape of health care, and improving the health of the populace. fte titles may change—such as the DNP—but the essence remains the same.

PRECURSORS AND ANTECEDENTS

ftere is a long and rich history of female lay healing with roots in both European and African cultures. Well into the 19th century, the female lay healer was the pri- mary health-care provider for most of the population.

fte sharing of skills and knowledge was seen as one’s ob- ligation as a member of a community. ftese skills were broad based and might have included midwifery, the use of herbal remedies, and even bone setting (Ehrenreich, 2000, p. xxxiii). Laurel Ulrich, in A Midwife’s Tale (1990), notes that when the diary of the midwife Martha Ballard opens in 1785, “. . . she knew how to manufac- ture salves, syrups, pills, teas, ointments, how to prepare an oil emulsion, how to poultice wounds, dress burns, treat dysentery, sore throat, frost bite, measles, colic, ‘whooping cough,’ ‘chin cough,’ . . . and ‘the itch,’ how to cut an infant’s tongue, administer a ‘clister’ (enema), lance an abscessed breast . . . induce vomiting, assuage bleeding, reduce swelling and relieve a toothache, as well as deliver babies” (p. 11).
Ulrich notes the tiny headstones marking the graves
of midwife Ballard’s deceased babies and children as fur- ther evidence of her ability to provide compassionate, knowledgeable care; she was able to understand the pain and suffering of others. fte emergence of a male medi- cal establishment in the 19th century marked the begin- ning of the end of the era of female lay healers, including midwives. fte lay healers saw their role as intertwined with one’s obligations to the community, whereas the emerging medical class saw healing as a commodity to be bought and sold (Ehrenreich & English, 1978). Has this really changed? Are not our current struggles still bound up with issues of gender, class, social position, and money? Have we not entered a phase of more-radical- than-ever division between the haves and have-nots with grave consequences to our social fabric?
Nursing histories (O’Brien, 1987) have documented
the emergence of professional nursing in the 19th cen- tury from women’s domestic duties and roles, extensions of the things that women and servants had always done for their families. Modern nursing is usually pinpointed as beginning in 1873, the year of the opening of the first three U.S. training schools for nurses, “as an effort on the part of women reformers to help clean up the mess the male doctors were making” (Ehrenreich, 2000, p. xxxiv). fte incoming nurses, for example, are credited with in- troducing the first bar of soap into Bellevue Hospital in the dark days when the medical profession was still re- sisting the germ theory of disease and aseptic techniques. fte emergence of a strong public health movement
in the 19th century, coupled with the Settlement House



Movement, created a new vista for independent and autonomous nursing practice. fte Henry Street Settle- ment, a brainchild of a recently graduated trained nurse named Lillian Wald, was a unique community-based nursing practice on the lower east side of New York City. Wald described these nurses who flocked to work with her at Henry Street Settlement as women of above av- erage “intellectual equipment,” of “exceptional charac- ter, mentality and scholarship” (Daniels, 1989, p. 24). And Wald herself was extraordinary in her abilities to coalition-build and raise funds from a variety of public and private sources to support her endeavors (Dunphy, 2011). fte nurses of the Henry Street Settlement, as has been well documented, enjoyed an exceptional degree of independence and autonomy in their nursing practice caring for the poor, often recent immigrants.
In 1893, Wald described a typical day. First, she vis-
ited the Goldberg baby and then Hattie Isaacs, a patient with consumption to whom she brought flowers. Wald spent 2 hours bathing her (“the poor girl had been with- out this attention for so long that it took me nearly two hours to get her skin clean”). Next, she inspected some houses on Hester Street where she found water closets that needed “chloride of lime” and notified the appro- priate authorities. In the next house, she found a child with “running ears,” which she “syringed,” showing the mother how to do it at the same time. In another room, there was a child with a “summer complaint”; Wald gave the child bismuth and tickets for a seaside excursion. Af- ter lunch she saw the O’Briens and took the “little one, with whooping cough” to play in the back of the Settle- ment House yard. On the next floor of that tenement, she found the Costria baby who had a sore mouth. Wald “gave the mother honey and borax and little cloths to keep it clean” (Coss, 1989, pp. 43–44). ftis was all before 2 p.m.! Far from being some new invention, midwives, nurse anesthetists, clinical nurse specialists (CNSs), and nurse practitioners (NPs) are merely new permutations of these long-standing nursing commitments and roles.

NURSE-MIDWIVES

ftroughout the 20th century, nurse-midwifery remained an anomaly in the U.S. health-care system. Nurse- midwives attend only a small percentage of all U.S.

births. Beginning in the 19th century, physicians laid claim to being the sole legitimate birth attendants in the United States, although it took them until the early years of the 20th century to achieve true dominance (Dawley, 2001; Dye, 1984). ftis is in contrast to Great Britain and many other European countries where trained mid- wives still attend a significant percentage of births. In Europe, homes remain an accepted place to give birth, whereas hospital births reign supreme in the United States. In contrast to Europe, the United States has little in the way of a tradition of professional midwifery. Once again, our crisis with the COVID-19 pandemic raised questions about this. Why not, in such times and with such stress on our health-care system, deliver babies at home, surrounded by friends and family? Would not this be far safer? (Kline & Hayes-Klein, 2020)
As late as 1910, 50% of all births in the United States
were reportedly attended by midwives, and the percent- age in large cities was often higher. However, at that time, the health status of the U.S. population, particularly in regard to perinatal health indicators, was poor (Bigbee & Amidi-Nouri, 2000). Midwives—unregulated and by most accounts unprofessional—were easy scapegoats on whom to blame the problem of poor maternal and in- fant outcomes. New York City’s Department of Health commissioned a study that claimed that the New York midwife was essentially “medieval.” According to this report, fully 90% were “hopelessly dirty, ignorant, and incompetent” (Edgar, 1911, p. 882). ftere was a con- certed movement away from home births. ftis was all part of an assault on midwifery by an increasingly pow- erful medical elite of obstetricians determined to control the birthing process.
ftese revelations resulted in the tightening of existing
laws and the creation of new legislation for the licensing and supervision of midwives (Kobrin, 1984). ftere was need for the “professionalizing” of the nurse-midwife, more grounding in scientific advances through education and regulation. Several states passed laws granting legal recognition and regulation of midwives, resulting in the establishment of schools of midwifery. One example, the Bellevue School for Midwives in New York City, lasted un- til 1935, when the diminishing need for midwives made it difficult to justify its existence (Komnenich, 1998). Ob- stetrical care continued the move into hospitals in urban areas that did not provide midwifery. For the most part,



the advance of nurse-midwifery has been a slow and ardu- ous struggle often at odds with mainstream nursing. For example, Lavinia Dock (1901) wrote that all births must be attended by physicians. Public health nurses, commit- ted to the professionalizing of nursing and adherence to scientific standards, chose to distance themselves from lay midwives. fte stigma of the unprofessional image of the lay midwife would linger for many years.
   A more successful example of midwifery was the founding of the Frontier Nursing Service (FNS) in 1925 by Mary Breckinridge in Kentucky. Breckinridge, having been educated as a public health nurse and traveling to Great Britain to become a certified nurse- midwife (CNM), pursued a vision of autonomous nurse-midwifery practice. She aimed to implement the British system in the United States (always a daunting enterprise on any front). In rural settings, where doc- tors were scarce and hospitals virtually nonexistent, mid- wifery found more fertile soil. However, even in these settings, professional nurse-midwifery had to struggle to bloom.
Breckinridge founded the FNS at a time when the
national maternal death rate stood at 6.7 per 1,000 live births, one of the highest rates in the Western world. More than 250,000 infants, nearly 1 in 10, died before they reached their first birthday (U.S. Department of Labor, 1920). fte Sheppard-Towner Maternity and In- fancy Act, enacted to provide public funds for maternal and child health programs, was the first federal legisla- tion passed for specifically this purpose (Cockerham & Keeling, 2012). Part of the intention of this act was to provide money to the states to train public health nurses in midwifery; however, this proved short-lived. By 1929, the bill lapsed; this was attributed to some opposition by the American Medical Association (AMA), which advo- cated the establishment of a “single standard” of obstet- rical care, care that is provided by doctors in hospital settings (Kobrin, 1984).
Breckinridge saw nurse-midwives working as in-
dependent practitioners and continued to advocate home births. And even more radically, the FNS saw nurse-midwives as offering complete care to women with normal pregnancies and deliveries. However, even Breckinridge and her supporters did not advocate the FNS model for cities where doctors were plentiful and middle-class women could afford medical care. She

stressed that the FNS was designed for impoverished “re- motely rural areas” without physicians (Cockerham & Keeling, 2012; Dye, 1984).
  fte American Association of Nurse-Midwives (AANM) was founded in 1928, originally as the Ken- tucky State Association of Midwives, which was an outgrowth of the FNS. First organized as a section of the National Organization of Public Health Nurses (NOPHN), the American College of Nurse-Midwives (ACNM) was incorporated as an independent specialty nursing organization in 1955 when the NOPHN was subsumed within the National League for Nursing (NLN). In 1956, the AANM merged with the college, forming the ACNM as it continues today. fte ACNM sponsored the Journal of Nurse-Midwifery, implemented an accreditation process of programs in 1962, and estab- lished a certification examination and process in 1971. ftis body also currently certifies non-nurses as midwives and maintains alliances with professional midwives who are not nurses. As noted by Bigbee and Amidi-Nouri (2000), CNMs are distinct from other APNs in that “they conceptualize their role as the combination of two disciplines, nursing and midwifery” (p. 12).
At their core, midwives as a group remain focused on
their primary commitment: care of mothers and babies regardless of setting and ability to pay. Rooted in holistic care and the most natural approaches possible, in 2019 there were 12,218 CNMs and 102 certified midwives (CMs) (ACNM Fact Sheet, 2020). CNMs or CMs at- tended 318,469 births, accounting for 12.1% of all vagi- nal births and 9.1% of total U.S. births (MacDorman & Desclercq, 2019). fte World Health Organization has named 2020 the Year of the Nurse and Midwife. CNMs are defined as primary care providers under federal law. CMs are also licensed, independent health-care providers who have completed the same midwifery education as CNMs. CMs are authorized to practice in Delaware, Hawaii, Maine, New Jersey, New York, and Rhode Island and have prescriptive authority in New York, Maine, and Rhode Island (ACNM Fact Sheet, 2020). fte first accredited CM education program began in 1996. fte CM credential is not yet recognized in all states.
Although midwives are well-known for attending
births, 53.3% of CNMs and CMs identify reproductive care and 33.1% identify primary care as main respon- sibilities in their full-time positions. Examples include



annual examinations, writing prescriptions, basic nutri- tion counseling, parenting education, patient education, and reproductive health visits (Kline & Hayes-Klein, 2020).

NURSE ANESTHETISTS

Nursing made medicine look good. —Baer, 1982
Surgical anesthesia was born in the United States in the mid-19th century. Immediately, there were rival claim- ants to its “discovery” (ftatcher, 1953). In 1846 at Mas- sachusetts General Hospital, William T. G. Morton first successfully demonstrated surgical anesthesia. Nitrous oxide was the first agent used and adopted by U.S. den- tists. Ether and chloroform followed shortly as agents for use in anesthetizing a patient. One barrier to surgery had been removed. However, it would take infection control and consistent, careful techniques in the administration of the various anesthetic agents for surgery to enter its “Golden Age.” It was only then that “surgery was trans- formed from an act of desperation to a scientific method of dealing with illness” (Rothstein, 1958, p. 258).
ftere are early accounts of nurses giving anesthesia
during the American Civil War, 1861–1865 (Moore, 1886; cited in ftatcher, 1953, p. 34). A history of Roman Catholic nuns in this same war also cited instances of nuns administering anesthesia (Jolly, 1927). Lusk et al. (2019) document Instructions for Administration of Chlo- roform from Adams Hampton (1893, pp. 331–336), an early textbook for nurses. ftey note that “. . . typically nurses only administered anesthesia when a physician was unavailable” (p. 3). ftey go on to note that “Follow- ing the increasingly scientific and specialized nature of giving anesthesia, the practice became the prerogative of physicians” (p. 3) with notable exceptions. For surgeons to advance their specialty, they needed someone to ad- minister anesthesia with care. However, anesthesiology lacked medical status; the surgeon collected the fee. No incentive existed for anyone with a medical degree to take up the work. Who would administer the anesthesia? And who would do so reliably and carefully? ftere was only one answer: nurses.
In her landmark book Watchful Care: A History of
America’s Nurse Anesthetists (1989), Marianne Bankert

explains how economics changed anesthesia practice. Physician-anesthetists “needed to establish their ‘claim’ to a field of practice they had earlier rejected” (p. 16), and to do this, it became necessary to deny, ignore, or denigrate the achievements of their nurse colleagues. fte most intriguing part of her study, she says, was “the process by which a rival—and less moneyed— group (in this case, nurses) is rendered historically ‘in- visible’” (p. 16).
   St. Mary’s Hospital, later to become known as the Mayo Clinic, played an important role in the devel- opment of anesthesia. It was here that Alice Magaw, sometimes referred to as the “Mother of Anesthesia,” practiced from 1860 to 1928. In 1899, she published a paper titled “Observations in Anesthesia” in North- western Lancet in which she reported giving anesthesia in more than 3,000 cases (Magaw, 1899). In 1906, she published another review of more than 14,000 successful anesthesia cases (Magaw, 1906). Bigbee and Amidi-Nouri (2000) note, “She stressed individual at- tention for all patients and identified the experience of anesthetists as critical elements in quickly responding to the patient” (p. 21). She also paid special attention to her patients’ psyches: She believed that “suggestion” was a great help “in producing a comfortable narcosis” (Bankert, 1989, p. 32). She noted that the anesthetist “must be able to inspire confidence in the patient” and that much of this depends on the approach (Bankert, 1989, p. 32). She stressed preparing the patient for each phase of the experience and of the need to “‘talk him to sleep’ with the addition of as little ether as pos- sible” (p. 33). Magaw contended that hospital-based anesthesia services, as a specialized field, should remain separate from nursing-service administrative structures (Bigbee & Amidi-Nouri, 2000). ftis presaged the es- trangement that has historically existed between nurse anesthetists and “regular” nurses; we see a nursing spe- cialty with expanded clinical responsibilities developing outside of mainstream nursing.
fte American Association of Nurse Anesthetists
(AANA) was founded in 1931 by Hodgins and originally named the National Association for Nurse Anesthetists. ftis group voted to affiliate with the American Nurses Association (ANA), only to be turned away. As early as 1909, Florence Henderson, a successor of Magaw’s, was invited to present a paper at the ANA convention with



no subsequent extension of an invitation to become a member of the organization (Komnenich, 1998). ftatcher (1953) speculates that organized nursing was fearful that nurse anesthetists could be charged with practicing medicine, a theme we will see repeated when we examine the history of the development of the NP role. ftis rejection led the AANA to affiliate with the American Hospital Association (AHA).
   fte relationship between nurse anesthetists and an- esthesiologists has always been, and continues to be, contentious. Consistent with health-care workforce data in general, there is a maldistribution of MDs, including anesthesiologists, who frequently choose to practice in areas where patients can afford to pay or in desirable ar- eas to live. Rural areas continue to be underserved as well as indigent areas in general. Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist (CRNAs) pick up the slack, “doing what has to be done” to meet the needs of underserved patients. Complicating this picture is that there is an uneven sup- ply of CRNAs in different geographic areas. As CRNAs retire later, unwilling to give up lucrative positions, some regions experience intergenerational hostility as well.
Despite a brief period of relative harmony from 1972
to 1976, when the AANA and the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) issued the “Joint Statement on Anesthesia Practice,” their partnership ended when the board of directors of the ASA withdrew its support of this statement, returning to a model that maintained physician control (Bankert, 1989, pp. 140–150).
  fte CRNA credential came into existence in 1956. At present, there are more than 54,000 CRNAs (AANA, 2020),* 40% of whom are male (compared with the ap- proximately 10% male population in nursing overall, a figure that has held steady for some time). CRNAs safely administer approximately 49 million anesthetics to pa- tients each year in the United States according to the AANA 2019 Practice Profile Survey.
   Interestingly, the inclusion of large numbers of males in its ranks has not eased the advance of this ven- erable nursing specialty; turf wars between practicing anesthesiologists and nurse anesthetists remain intense as of this writing, further aggravated by the incursion of “doctor-nurses” or “nurse-doctors.” Nonetheless, nurse anesthetists continue to thrive and have situated

* In some states, the title CRNA has been changed to APN-Anesthesia.

themselves in the mainstream of graduate-level nurs- ing education. It was in 2007 that the AANA issued a commitment that the Doctor of Nurse Anesthesia Practice (DNAP) be the entry into practice by 2025 (AANA, 2007; Lusk et al., 2019, p. 7). Glass (2009)
documents the first post-baccalaureate DNP program for CRNAs in 2009. fteir inclusion in the spectrum of advanced practice nursing continues to be invigo- rating for all of us.

THE CLINICAL NURSE SPECIALIST


fte role of the CNS is the one strand of advanced prac- tice nursing that arose and was nurtured by mainstream nursing education and nursing organizations. Indeed, one could say it arose from the very bosom of traditional nursing practice. As early as 1900, in the American Jour- nal of Nursing, Katherine DeWitt wrote that the devel- opment of nursing specialties, in her view, responded to a “need for perfection within a limited domain” (Sparacino, 1986, p. 1). According to DeWitt, nursing specialties were a response to “present civilization and modern science [that] demand a perfection along each line of work formerly unknown” (Sparacino, 1986, p. 1). She argued that “the new nurse is more useful, at least to the patient himself, and ultimately to the family and community. Her sphere is more limited, but her patient receives better care” (Sparacino, 1986, p. 1).
Historically, nurses were trained and worked in hos-
pitals that were structured for the convenience of the doctors around specific populations of patients. Early on, nurses initiated guidelines for the care of unique populations and often garnered a hands-on kind of in- timacy, an expertise in the care of certain patients that was not to be denied. Caring day in and day out for patients suffering from similar conditions enabled nurses to develop specialized and advanced skills not practiced by other nurses. ftink of the nurses who cared exclu- sively for patients with tuberculosis, syphilis, and polio. Because these conditions are no longer common, any nursing expertise that might have been developed has been lost.
In a 1943 speech, Frances Reiter first used the term
nurse-clinician. She believed that “practice is the ab- solute primary function of our profession” and “that



means the direct care of patients” (Reiter, 1966). fte nurse-clinician, as Reiter conceived the role, consisted of three spheres. fte first sphere, clinical compe- tence, included three additional dimensions of func- tion, which she termed care, cure, and counseling. fte nurse-clinician was labeled “the Mother Role,” in which the nurse protects, teaches, comforts, and en- courages the patient. fte second sphere, as envisioned by Reiter, involved clinical expertise in the coordina- tion and continuity of the patient’s care. In the final sphere, she believed in what she called “professional maturity,” wherein the physician and nurse “share a mutual responsibility for the welfare of patients” (Reiter, 1966, p. 277). It was only through such work- ing together that the patient could best be served and nursing achieve “its greatest potential” (Reiter, 1966). Although Reiter believed that the nurse-clinician should have advanced clinical competence, she did not specify that the nurse-clinician should be prepared at the master’s level.
In 1943, the National League for Nursing Education
advocated a plan to develop these nurse-clinicians, enlist- ing universities to educate them (Menard, 1987). fte GI Bill was also becoming available. Nurses in the Armed Services were eligible to receive funds for their educa- tion. Esther Lucile Brown, in her 1948 report Nursing for the Future, promoted developing clinical specialties in nursing as a way of strengthening and advancing the profession. Traditionally, graduate education in nursing had focused on “functional” areas, that is, nursing edu- cation and nursing administration.
   It took the entrance of another strong nurse leader, Hildegard Peplau, to move these ideas forward to fru- ition. In 1953, she had both a vision and a plan: She wanted to prepare psychiatric nurse-clinicians at the graduate level who could offer direct care to psychiatric patients, thus helping to close the gap between psychi- atric theory and nursing practice (Callaway, 2002). In addition, as always there was a great need for health- care providers of all stripes in psychiatric settings. In her first 2 years at Rutgers University in New Jersey, Peplau developed a 19-month master’s program that prepared only CNSs in psychiatric nursing. In contrast, existing programs, such as that at Teachers College in New York City, attempted to prepare nurses for teaching and su- pervision in a 10-month program, as noted previously.
  
fte field of psychiatric nursing was in the process of inventing itself. Before the passage of the National Mental Health Act in 1946, there was no such field as psychiatric nursing. It was the availability of National Institute of Mental Health funds to “seed” such pro- grams as Peplau’s that allowed psychiatric nursing to begin and eventually to f lourish. In retrospect, Peplau would note that no encouragement was received from the two major nursing organizations of the day, the NLN and the ANA. According to Callaway (2002), she stated, “We were highly stigmatized. Any nurse who worked in [the field of mental health] was con- sidered almost certifiable. . . . We were thoroughly unpopular, we were considered queer enough to be avoided” (p. 229).
fte “received wisdom” of the day was the axiom fol-
lowed by the vast majority of nurses that “a nurse is a nurse is a nurse,” opposing any differentiation between who was doing what among them. Peplau’s rigorous curriculum and clinical and academic program require- ments expected that faculty would continue their own clinical practice, do clinical research, and publish the results (Callaway, 2002). ftis was a radical model for nursing faculty, few of whom were doctorally prepared in the 1950s. In 1956, only 2 years following the initi- ation of the first clinically focused graduate program, a national working conference on graduate education in psychiatric nursing formally developed the role of the psychiatric clinical specialist.
Most hospital training schools remained embedded
in a functional method of nursing well into the 1960s. As originally conceptualized by Isabel Stewart in the 1930s, “nurses were trained and much of nursing prac- tice was rule-based and activity-oriented” (Fairman, 1999, p. 42), relying heavily on repetition of skills and procedures. ftere was little, if any, scientific understand- ing of the principles underlying care. ftere was little, if any, intellectual content to be found in the nursing curriculum.
   With the advent of antibiotics in the 1940s and the resulting decline of infectious diseases, nurses’ practice shifted to caring for patients with acute, often rapidly changing exacerbations of chronic conditions. Spe- cialties evolved such as the coronary care nursing spe- cialist (Lynaugh & Fairman, 1992). Leaders such as Peplau, along with others such as Virginia Henderson,



Frances Reiter, and later Dorothy Smith, began devel- oping a theoretical orientation for practice. Students were being taught to assess patient responses to their illnesses and to make analytical decisions. Smith ex- perimented with the idea of a nurse-clinician who had 24-hour responsibility for a patient area and who was on call. Laura Simms at Cornell University–New York Hospital School of Nursing developed a CNS role to provide consultation to more generalist nurses. As opposed to the nurse who might have been expert in procedures, these new clinicians were experts in clin- ical care for a certain population of patients. ftis de- velopment occurred across specialties and was seen in oncology, nephrology, psychiatry, and intensive care units (Sills, 1983).
Role expansion of the CNS grew rapidly during the
1960s because of several factors. Advances in medi- cal technology and medical specialization increased the need for nurses who were competent to care for patients with complex health needs. Nurses returning from the battlefields of Vietnam sought to increase their knowledge and skills and continue to practice in advanced roles and nontraditional areas (such as trauma or anesthesia). Role definitions for women loosened and expanded. ftere was a shortage of phy- sicians. fte Nurse Training Act of 1964 allocated nec- essary federal funds for additional graduate nursing education programs in different clinical specialties (Lusk et al., 2019).
fte terms nurse-clinician, CNS, and nurse specialist,
among others, were used extensively by nurses with ex- perience or advanced knowledge who had developed an expertise within a given area of patient care. ftere were no standards regarding educational requirements or ex- perience. In 1965, the ANA developed a position state- ment declaring that only those nurses with a master’s degree or higher in nursing should claim the role of CNS (ANA, 1965). ftese trends continued into the 1970s. fte number of academic programs providing master’s preparation in a variety of practice areas increased. Fed- eral grants, including those from the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, continued to provide funding for nursing education at the master’s and doc- toral levels.
In 1976, during the ANA’s  Congress on Nursing
Practice, a position statement on the role of the CNS

was issued. fte ANA position statement read as follows (ANA Congress for Nursing Practice, 1976):
fte clinical nurse specialist (CNS) is a practitioner holding a master’s degree with a concentration in specific areas of clinical nursing. fte role of the CNS is defined by the needs of a select client population, the expectation of the larger society and the clinical expertise of the nurse.
fte statement went on to elaborate that “by exercis- ing leadership ability and judgment,” the CNS is able to affect client care on the individual, direct-care pro- vider level as well as affect change within the broader health-care system (ANA Congress for Nursing Practice, 1976).
  fte 1970s were a time of growth in academic CNS programs; the 1980s were years in which refinements oc- curred. In 1980, the ANA revised its earlier policy state- ment of 1976 to define the CNS as “a registered nurse who, through study and supervised clinical practice at the graduate level (master’s or doctorate) has become an expert in a defined area of knowledge and practice in a selected clinical area of nursing” (ANA, 1980, p. 23). ftis statement was significant because it was the first time that education at the master’s level had been dic- tated as a mandatory criterion for entry into expert practice.
fte CNS role, more than any other advanced nursing
role, was situated in the mainstream of graduate nurs- ing education with the first master’s degree in psychi- atric and mental health nursing conferred by Rutgers University in 1955. fte inclusion of clinical content in master’s degree education was an essential step forward for nursing’s advancement. But the implementation and use of the CNS avoided easy categorization and their efficacy was elusive.
   In February 1983, the ANA Council of Clinical Nurse Specialists met for the first time (Sparacino, 1990). fte council grew rapidly throughout the subsequent years, supporting and providing educational conferences for the increasing numbers of CNSs. In 1986, the coun- cil published the CNS’s role statement. ftis statement identified the roles of the CNS as specialist in clinical practice and as educator, consultant, researcher, and ad- ministrator. ftis role statement by the council depicted the changing role of the CNS, notably delegating and



overseeing practice as its primary focus (Fulton, 2002). fte year 1986 was also notable for the publication of the journal Clinical Nurse Specialist: The Journal for Ad- vanced Nursing.
   In 1986, the ANA’s Council of Clinical Nurse Spe- cialists and the Council of Primary Health Care Pro- viders published an editorial outlining the similarities of the CNS and NP roles. Discussion surrounding the commonalities of both specialties occurred through- out the decade. In 1989, during the annual meeting of the National Organization of Nurse Practitioner Fac- ulty (NONPF), the 10-year-old debate regarding the merger of the two roles reached a crescendo without resolution (Lincoln, 2000). It remains an issue of con- tention to the present day. Despite this, the two ANA councils did merge in 1990, becoming the Council of Nurses in Advanced Practice (Busen & Engleman, 1996; Lincoln, 2000). Following the merger of the councils, several studies were published comparing CNS and NP roles, finding the education for practice generally comparable (Joel, 2011).
fte dissolution of the CNS council was of con-
cern to CNSs around the country, who continued to meet at conferences (https://nacns.org/about-us/ history/ accessed Nov. 12, 2020). ftese CNS lead- ers formed a national association in 1992, naming it the National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists (NACNS). ftey began drafting a constitution, bylaws, and a framework for functioning, supported by faculty and staff at the Indiana University School of Nursing. At the 1994 national CNS conference held in India- napolis, they presented their work. Sixty-nine charter members joined; and in 1995, with assistance from the American Association of Critical Care Nurses (AACN), the NACNS became a legal entity. Within 2 years, the NACNS had 530 members, which now number more than 2,000. fte organization represents the more than 70,000 CNSs working in hospitals and health systems, clinics and ambulatory settings, and colleges and uni- versities today.
fte 1990s was also an era of health-care “reform.”
Health-care costs were skyrocketing; hospital stays were shorter with acutely ill patients being discharged quicker and sicker. Because of fiscal mandates, hospi- tals were decreasing the number of beds and personnel and the focus of health care shifted from hospital to

ambulatory care within the community and home. fte historically hospital-based CNS was considered too ex- pensive and unproven. ftus, CNSs all over were losing positions.
   In 1993, the American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) met to discuss educational needs and requirements for the 21st century. At the AACN’s an- nual conference in December 1994, members voted to support the merging of the CNS and NP roles in the curricula of graduate education in nursing. Although the structure of the curricula suggested in the AACN’s “Essentials of Masters Education for Advanced Practice Nursing” (1996), as well as the ANA’s “Scope and Stan- dards of Advanced Practice Registered Nursing” (ANA, 1996) were widely adopted, the lived reality of role adaptation and its implementation in the marketplace has been less uniform and more divisive. Educational requirements for CNS practice involved many special- ties, standards, and differing certification examinations. Enrollments have declined, per AACN data, to under 2,000 in 2015 (Lusk et al., 2019, pp. 14–15).
Scope-of-practice barriers continue in this area of
advanced practice nursing. fte latest setback occurred when the Standard Occupational Classification Policy Committee (SOCPC) announced its recommendations to the Office of Management and Budget for the 2018 Standard Occupational Classification on July 22, 2016. fte SOCPC declined to include the CNS in a separate broad occupation and detailed occupation category, stating:
Multiple dockets requested a new detailed occupation for Clinical Nurse Specialists. fte SOCPC did not accept this recommendation based on Classification Principle 2, which states that occupations are clas- sified based on work performed and on Classification Principle 9 on collectability.
   In July 2014, the NACNS submitted an extensive filing on why the CNS should be included in the Stan- dard Occupational Classification (SOC) as a “broad category.” ftis is the second time that the SOCPC did not accept the request to make the CNS a new detailed occupation in the SOC. Retaining CNSs in the RNs 2010 classifications is inconsistent with federal agencies, with nursing practice in the states, and with the larger nursing community, all of which distinguish CNSs as



APRNs. Congress has accepted CNSs as APRNs for nearly two decades. fte Balanced Budget Act of 1997 allowed CNSs to directly bill their services through the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services under Part B participation in Medicare. CNSs were recognized as eligible for Medicare’s Primary Care Incentive Pro- gram in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA, 2010).
   CNSs prescribe medications, durable medical equip- ment, and medical supplies as well as order, perform, and interpret diagnostic tests including laboratory work and x-rays. Two unequivocal differences exist between CNSs and RNs: diagnosing patients and prescribing pharmaceuticals. CNSs can perform both; RNs are not authorized to perform either. fte SOCPC’s recommen- dation to not recognize the CNS as a broad and detailed occupation, similar to how other APRNs are catego- rized, skews the quality and utility of federal health-care policy data. Linking the CNS workforce data with the RN workforce does not allow CNS contributions to be differentiated from or compared with any other APRN data. Simply put, a database set up by any federal, state, regional, local, research, or private entity using the 2010 SOC categories has no data on the more than 70,000 CNSs in the United States (NACNS, 2020).
fte “other side” of this story of advanced prac-
tice nursing—NP evolution—is addressed in the next section of this chapter. fte futures of these various roles remain on some level intertwined and are further com- plicated by the emergence of a new model of educational preparation: the DNP.

THE EVOLUTION OF THE NURSE
PRACTITIONER ROLE: “A DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION”

fte history of the NP “movement” has been extensively documented (Brush & Capezuti, 1996; Fairman, 1999, 2008; Jacox, 2002; Lusk et al., 2019; Towers, 1995). A lesser known story involves Dr. Eugene A. Stead, Jr., of Duke University, who in 1957 conceived of an advanced role for nurses somewhere between the role of the nurse and the doctor. ftelma Ingles, a nursing faculty mem- ber on a sabbatical, worked with Stead, accompanying the interns and residents on rounds, seeing patients, and

managing increasingly ill patients with acumen and sen- sitivity. Ingles shared Stead’s ideas and returned to the Duke Nursing School to create a master of science in nursing program modeled on her experience with Stead. Stead was gratified and anxious to impart this expanded role to other nursing faculty, envisioning a new role for nurses with, in his view, expanded autonomy. He was shocked at the “lukewarm” response of the dean of nursing at Duke and the unsupportive stance of several prominent nurses at the university. On top of that, the NLN, the school’s accrediting body, did not approve of Ingles’s new program for nurse clinical specialization and withheld the program’s accreditation. ftey found the program “unstructured” and criticized the use of physicians as instructors to teach courses for nurses in a nursing program. ftey disavowed the study of the esteemed discipline of medicine that Stead was so anx- ious to impart (Holt, 1998). Instead, they wanted the students to study “nursing.” Stead could not understand this. What was there in nursing to study? Rejected and disheartened, Stead eventually turned to military corps- men to actualize this new role, which he named physi- cian assistant. He insisted that they be male. In his view, nurse leaders were very antagonistic to innovation and change (Christman, 1998). In the view of some, this was a missed opportunity for organized nursing but one gov- erned by historical circumstances when viewed on the broader stage of history. Fairman (2008), in an extensive study of Stead’s papers, offers the appraisal that “Stead’s difficulties went beyond his experiences with organized and academic nursing. ftey reflected his perceptions of the kind of help his physician colleagues needed” (Fairman, 2008, p. 98).
Stead’s original proposal was quite prescient. Gender
roles were loosening as were hierarchical structures in general; nurses were better educated and well able to as- sume the role responsibilities that Stead envisioned. Yet it came at a time when nursing was merely a fledgling discipline, new to the university, new to development as an academic discipline, and new to doctoral educa- tion. Academic nursing was fixated on defining its own knowledge base and developing its own unique sci- ence. Along with expanded opportunities for women came ideas of an autonomous nursing role separate and distinct from medicine. Stead’s deeply rooted gen- der-role stereotyping no doubt further inflamed nursing



resistance to “his” new role. Other settings—such as the University of Colorado, where Henry Silver, a pediatri- cian, and Loretta Ford, a master’s-prepared public health nurse, founded a partnership rooted in collaboration— provided more fruitful results. All these factors were in play when the first NPs emerged in the 1960s.
   However, the NP was not really a new role for nurses. Examining our history, it is apparent that nurses func- tioned independently and autonomously before the rise of organized medicine. If medicine was ambivalent about the emergence of this new role, nursing itself was no less conflicted.
   In 1978, the following statement appeared in the American Journal of Nursing (Roy & Obloy, 1978, p. 1698):
fte nurse practitioner movement has become an is- sue in nursing, a topic on which there is no consen- sus. One question about the movement is whether the development of the nurse practitioner role adds to, or detracts from, the development of nursing as a distinct scientific discipline.
ftis statement was issued more than 13 years after the initiation of the first NP program at the University of Colorado. If, as Sparacino (1990) spells out, the domain of the CNS is situated in the secondary and tertiary set- ting, the domain of the NP originally arose as a role sit- uated in primary care.
   Loretta Ford and Dr. Henry Silver originally designed a certificate program curriculum for pediatric nurses to provide ambulatory care to poor rural Colorado chil- dren. fte goal of this program was to bridge the gap be- tween the health-care needs of children and the family’s ability to access and afford primary health care (Ford & Silver, 1967; Silver et al., 1967). ftis certificate program included courses such as health promotion and growth and development with the intent of the student under- standing the principles of healthy childcare and patient education. Nurses would then be able to provide pre- ventive nursing services outside the hospital setting in collaboration with physicians. Students had to have a baccalaureate degree and public health nursing experi- ence to be admitted to the program.
Ford notes that the lack of organizational leadership
in the profession coupled with a lack of responsiveness in academic settings caused a “bastardization of the model”

(Jacox, 2002, p. 157). She had envisioned that our pro- fessional organization, as in other professions, would identify, credential, and advance the new role. However, Ford was to discover that the “ANA in those early years was reluctant to stick its neck out and give some leader- ship to the NP groups that were growing rapidly” and that the lack of leadership in nursing education created “a patchwork quilt” of differently prepared NPs (Jacox, 2002, p. 157). Although clinically based programs were growing, there remained resistance to the NP model. Ford (Jacox, 2002, p. 155) says,
I understood that faculty members were supposed to be doing just that—push the borders of knowledge and publish their work. In my naiveté of faculty pol- itics, I expected that since the NP model grew out of professional nursing and public health nursing— including primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention and community-based services—it was a perfectly legitimate investigation. Instead, it became a battle- ground, and even recently was labeled in the Harvard Business Review as a “Disruptive Innovation.” What a compliment!
fte collaboration between NP and physician has been analyzed and debated since the advent of the NP role, including the relationship between Ford and Silver (Fairman, 2002, 2008). fte sticking point of collabo- ration is that it has included the heavy implication of supervision and thus control. In truth, in the early 1970s both NPs and physicians had to give up their traditional roles, tasks, and knowledge to establish this new provider role, often in the face of organizational and societal op- position. Jan Towers describes the growth of her own NP practice as follows: “fte area that I perhaps most feared turned out to be the least troublesome, after some ini- tial adjustments between the physician with whom I was working and me were made” (Towers, 1995, p. 269). What would often be impossible on an organizational level was more easily resolvable among professionals with a shared interest and commitment: the good of the patient.
Prescriptive authority was—and continues to be in
some states—a major issue. It was either delegated from the medical practice act and carried out under physicians’ standing orders or protocols or it came directly from the nursing practice acts. Nurse historian Arlene Keeling



has argued that far from being a new realm of nursing practice, the “prescribing”—or use—of a variety of tech- niques and substances for therapeutic effect has always been a dimension of nursing practice (Keeling, 2007). fte states of Oregon and Washington allowed nurses the freedom to prescribe independently in 1983 (Kalisch & Kalisch, 1986). Some of the fiercest turf battles have heated up over prescriptive privileges. By 1984, nurses were accused of practicing medicine, although they were practicing well within the scope of their expanded role. Physicians remained ambivalent. ftey pushed NPs to function broadly but did not usually support legislation that authorized an increased scope of practice, especially in the area of prescriptive privileges. Joan Lynaugh, nurse historian, describes NPs as looking for an “exam room of their own”—essentially a clinical space in which to provide nursing care (Fairman, 2008, p. 7). ftis space is indeed a crowded one (Fairman, 2008, p. 200, note 9). Prescriptive authority is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 6.
fte Great Society entitlement programs significantly
influenced the need for NPs to care for people who were covered under Medicare and Medicaid. Predominant social movements—women’s rights, civil rights, antiwar protest, consumerism—had a profound impact on the need for groups to assert their place in the society of the 1960s and early 1970s. Nurses were not immune to the forces unleashed in these years and took advantage of the opportunities to work with physicians “in rela- tionships that were entrepreneurial and groundbreaking, and to engage in a kind of dialogue that supported new models of care” (Fairman, 2002, p. 165). ftese nurses were pioneers, rebels, and renegades treading on uncer- tain ground.
fte National Advisory Commission on Health Man-
power supported the NP movement (Moxley, 1968). fte Committee to Study Extended Roles for Nurses in the early 1970s recommended that the expanded role for nurses was necessary to provide the consumer with access to health care and proposed the inclusion of highly devel- oped health assessment skills (Kalisch & Kalisch, 1986; Leininger et al., 1972; Marchione & Garland, 1997). Although the committee did stop short of providing a definitive scope-of-practice statement, it recommended support for licensure and certification for advanced practice, recognition in the nursing practice act, further

cost-benefit research, and surveys on role impact. Gov- ernment and private groups rapidly developed funding support for educational programs (Hamric et al., 2013). According to Marchione and Garland (1997), “fte tra- ditional role of humanistic caring, comforting, nurturing and supporting was to be maintained and improved by the addition” of new primary care functions that the De- partment of Health, Education, and Welfare approved: total patient assessment, monitoring, health promotion, and a focus that encompassed not only disease preven- tion but health promotion and maintenance, treatment, and continuity of care.
fte Division of Nursing of the Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare tracked the development of the NP role from 1974 to 1977. During that time, the num- ber of NP programs rose from 86 to 178 across the country with significant governmental support through the Nurse Training Act to advanced practice nursing education programs of all types. Although nurse educators by this time wanted NP education standardized, in 1977 most NP programs awarded a certificate with some still using continuing education models and accepting less than a baccalaureate degree for entry. However, the number of NP graduates of master’s programs did increase from 20% in 1975 to 26% in 1977, again largely encouraged by the availability of federal funds for support. fte education of NPs was the rallying cry for the formation of the NONPF in 1980, dedicated to defining curriculum and evaluation standards as well as pioneering research and development related to NP practice and teaching-learning method- ologies. fte political voice for NPs was enhanced with the formation of the American Academy of Nurse Prac- titioners (AANP) in 1985 and the American College of Nurse Practitioners (ACNP) in 2003.
fte Nurse Training Acts of 1971 and 1975 were criti-
cal in providing federal funding to support NP programs. By 1979, more than 133 programs and tracks existed, and approximately 15,000 NPs were in practice. By 1983 and 1984, NP graduates numbered approximately 20,000 to 24,000; they were primarily employed in sites that served those in greatest need: public health departments, com- munity health centers, outpatient and rural clinics, health maintenance organizations, school-based clinics, and oc- cupational health clinics (Kalisch & Kalisch, 1986; Lusk et al., 2019; Pulcini & Wagner, 2001). NPs were typically providing care for health promotion, disease  prevention,



minor acute problems, chronic stabilized illness, and the full range of teaching and coaching that nurses have al- ways provided for patients and families.
   A hindrance to practice in rural areas was finding appropriate physician backup. By 1987, the federal government had spent $100 million to promote NP education, primarily through the U.S. Public Health Service Division of Nursing (Pulcini & Wagner, 2001). By the 1980s, the master’s degree was viewed broadly as the educational standard for advanced practice (Geolot, 1987; Sultz et al., 1983), and by 1989, 90% of programs were master’s and post-master’s level (Pulcini & Wagner, 2001). fte NONPF thrived in the 1980s, developing curriculum guidelines and competencies, surveying fac- ulties, and studying role components.
An interorganizational task force to identify criteria
for quality NP educational programs occurred as an outgrowth of the work to unify certification. ftis work, begun in 1995 by the NONPF and NLN, was the be- ginning of the development of a model curriculum for NP education that would be used nationally and pro- vide the basis for certification eligibility (Hamric et al., 2013). At that time, the NLN was the only accrediting body for nursing graduate programs, and program stan- dards, curriculum guides, and domains and competen- cies for NP education from the NONPF were often used by the NLN in the accreditation process. In 1998, the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education, an ac- creditation arm of the AACN, was formed to provide an alternative to the NLN as a source of accreditation to schools offering baccalaureate and higher degrees in nursing. fte thrust of the 2001 meeting of the NP task force when it reconvened was for accrediting bod- ies to move toward the approval of NONPF guidelines and standards as the reigning accepted standards for ac- creditation of programs preparing NPs (Edwards et al., 2003). In addition, the APRN Consensus Model (see later section) spells out specific criteria for preapproval and accreditation of APRN education.
ftere is a cautionary note to this perception of prog-
ress. Despite clear statutes in some states, credentialing by insurers for NPs may still lag, providing additional barriers to care. Scope of practice, a primary focus of the 2011 Institute of Medicine (IOM) Future of Nursing recommendations, remains a contested battleground for control of professional practice and reimbursement.
  
In 2008, the adoption of the Consensus Model for Advanced Practice Registered Nurse (APRN) Regula- tion by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) gave direction for gains in legal authority, pre- scriptive privilege, and reimbursement mechanisms across the 50 states and the District of Columbia. Current NPs have achieved a higher degree of autonomy in practice and associated prestige (Phillips, 2011) with the mandate for continued advancement contained in the IOM report The Future of Nursing (2011). More victories than fail- ures provide evidence of success, but, as in the late 1970s, today’s NP is still battling for autonomy and consumer recognition in practice, especially in states with many physicians. Veterans’ Health Affairs (VHA) Advanced Practice Registered Nurses Proposed Rule (81 F.R. 33155 [proposed May 25, 2016]) to the Federal Register passed in 2016 with the CRNAs left behind (Livanos, 2017); implementation of this rule still varies widely from VA to VA. As early as 1985, Hayes stated, “No role in nursing, or for that matter, in any field has been so debated in the literature, and possibly no other nursing function has ever been so obsessed about by those performing it as has been the NP role” (Hayes, 1985, p. 145). Yet, as Hayes asserts, there has been an avalanche of support from sat- isfied consumers of NP services.

THE CONSENSUS MODEL


In an effort to bring some clarity to and standardization of advanced practice nursing roles, in 2008 the APRN Consensus Model, also referred to as a regulatory model, was published by the APRN Consensus Work Group and the NCSBN APRN Advisory Committee with extensive input from a larger APRN stakeholder community. fte nomenclature APRN was adopted, and four APRN roles were defined in the document: CNMs, CRNAs, CNSs, and certified nurse practitioners (CNPs). An APRN is further defined as an RN who has completed a graduate degree or postgraduate program that has prepared him or her to practice in one of these four roles. fte acro- nym LACE—standing for “licensure, accreditation, cer- tification, and education”—demonstrates alliances across these spheres for implementation of the APRN Consen- sus Model, thus promoting uniformity and standardiza- tion of the APRN role for the safety of the consumer



of health care. ftis model has been widely implemented with an alignment of current national certifying examina- tions with educational program offerings and subsequent licensure. ftis is amazing given the continued strength of states’ rights and the opposition of organized medicine.

YET ANOTHER “DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION”: THE DOCTOR OF NURSING PRACTICE

fte future of nursing contains clouds on the horizon as well as sunshine. Fairman (1999) cautions that although local negotiations between individual physicians and nurses may have been, in some cases, easily traversed in the interest of the good of the patient, on the profes- sional level hierarchical relationships and power are at stake. As noted at the start of this chapter, within this hotly competitive health-care environment, with the still controversial implementation of the PPACA (2010), the entire health-care sector continues to face hurdles, challenges, and assaults. Our political environment re- mains contentious, disruptive, and polarized—indeed, paralyzed. ftis is mirrored in the health-care sector and between health-care disciplines.
In October 2004, the members of the AACN en-
dorsed the Position Statement on the Practice Doctorate in Nursing, which called for the movement of educational preparation for advanced practice nursing roles from the master’s degree to the doctoral level by 2015. Although this target date has not been achieved, there has been much movement in this direction, and DNP programs are experiencing dramatic growth. ftis “new” doctorate is a “practice” doctorate in contrast to the doctor of phi- losophy (PhD)—the traditional research degree—and is not intended to “replace” the PhD. ftere are many rea- sons for this development. Some master’s programs for APNs had become very lengthy without any change in the credential awarded at the completion of studies. fte number of credits, in many cases, approaches what is re- quired for a doctoral degree. And many educators believe that this is necessary to ensure clinical competency. Fur- thermore, other practice disciplines such as pharmacy, physiotherapy, and occupational therapy have moved on to doctoral-level preparation. fte debate continues. See Chapter 4 for more discussion on this issue.

THE IOM ISSUES ITS 2010 REPORT: THE FUTURE OF NURSING: LEADING CHANGE, ADVANCING HEALTH


ftis dramatic, evidence-based report presents the results of 2 years of study by the Committee on the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Initiative on the Future of Nursing at the IOM. ftis committee was chaired by Donna Shalala, PhD, FAAN, long-time nurse advocate, former head of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1992–2000), and now University of Miami president, in concert with Nursing Vice Chair Linda Burnes Bolton, RN, DrPH, FAAN. ftis report was presented in November 2010. fte far-reaching impact of the report’s recommendations are just now beginning to be fully absorbed. Key recommendations begin with the assumption that “nursing can fill . . . new and expanded roles in a redesigned healthcare system” (IOM, 2011,
p. xi). We will need our renegades, rebels, and trailblazers
more than ever.

SUMMARY


fte boundaries of practice are always malleable. ftey are always subject to myriad external forces—political, economic, social, and cultural—and are interpreted in different ways by different practitioners. APRNs are a mixed breed; each trajectory under the umbrella of ad- vanced nursing practice has evolved differently and un- der variable circumstances. ftis leads to vigor, strength, and diversity. fte struggles documented within this chapter have aimed to strengthen each variant of the nursing advanced practice role. fte struggles are not over; in many ways, they are just beginning. It is our hope that nursing will continue to produce rebels, renegades, and trailblazers motivated by concern for patients, concern for community, and concern for hu- manity. We have no doubt that we will continue to take on new and challenging roles using creative and diverse strategies. fte COVID-19 pandemic merely highlights the urgency of these issues and shines a blinding light upon ongoing health disparities and inequities. Nurs- ing continues to lurch forward; progress is sometimes slow, sometimes variable, sometimes unsteady—but, as always, nurses continue to find opportunity in chaos,


motivated, as ever, by commitment to patients, fami- lies, and communities, to human need and alleviation of suffering.















Emerging Roles of the Advanced Practice Nurse
Patricia A. Tabloski




Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Describe the advanced practice registered nurses (APRN) Scope of Practice and the Consensus Model.
• Discuss how the care provided by APRNs contributes to cost savings, quality
improvement, and implementation of evidence-based practice.
• Identify role highlights of the APRN in primary care with adult, older adult, and pediatric populations in various community settings; in psychiatric and mental health care; in women’s health/gender-related care; and in acute care with neonatal, pediatric, adult, and the older adult populations.
• Discuss nurse-midwifery with an emphasis on primary care and first-assistant
services.
• Summarize the new certification requirements for APRNs.
• Discuss palliative and hospice care as an emerging practice area for all APRNs.
• Propose diverse practice opportunities for APRNs with emphasis on emerging roles.






18



INTRODUCTION

Advanced practice nursing continues to evolve to meet the changing and increasing needs of patients, communi- ties, and society as a whole. Advanced practice registered nurses (APRNs)* have successfully adapted their roles to meet these ever-changing needs and expectations. fte growth occurring now can be attributed to several ele- ments, such as health-care reform and fuller implemen- tation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), a national emphasis on the provision of safe and high-quality care, pay-for-performance initiatives, and the call by the Institute of Medicine (IOM)’s Future of Nursing (2011) report for APRNs to work to the full- est extent of their scopes of practice without restrictions or barriers. ftese initiatives foster new opportunities for the development of advanced practice nursing roles.
Progress has been achieved on some of the Future
of Nursing report’s goals, but clearly work is needed on others. One of the goals of the report was to increase the number of nurses with a bachelor’s degree to 80% by 2020. Progress to date notes that 54% of employed nurses now hold bachelor’s degrees (up from 49% in 2010). A second goal was to double the number of em- ployed nurses with a doctoral degree by 2020. ftis rec- ommendation has been achieved, growing from 10,022 in 2010 to 33,640 in 2018. Additionally, progress has been made by state legislatures to enable APRNs to prac- tice to the full extent of their education and training. We have increased the number of nurses assuming leadership positions on boards to 7,100 (goal was 10,000) and in- creased race/ethnicity and gender diversity to begin to approach levels that represent the U.S. population. Small progress has been achieved, but percentages of men and ethnically and culturally diverse persons are still well be- low national statistics (Campaign for Action, 2020).
Several factors have influenced the emergence  and
acceptability of advanced practice roles. ftese factors include the growing numbers of older patients as baby boomers reach retirement age, increased complexity and
 	
* APRN is the title preferred by the American Nurses Association (ANA) and used in most state practice acts. Throughout this chapter, various ac- ronyms are presented to distinguish between specialty preparations, but the generic title for all these practice roles is APRN. Please note that not all of the four advanced practice specialty preparations are recognized in their state as APRNs.

severity of illness in hospitalized patients, recent experi- ences with a pandemic accompanied by systemic failures within our public health infrastructure, further reduc- tions in medical residents’ clinical work hours, a call for greater access to care for all citizens, and nursing and primary care physician shortages that vary by geographi- cal region. ftese and other factors will continue to influ- ence the growth and acceptance of the APRN role in the coming decades.
   APRNs provide direct patient care including diag- nosis and treatment of illness; collaborate with other health-care professionals to advise on public health is- sues; oversee and manage chronic diseases; and provide specialty care consistent with their education, including administration of anesthesia, pain management services, quality end-of-life care, and holistic maternity care in- cluding infant delivery. APRNs must possess at least a master’s degree in addition to the basic nursing educa- tion, state licensing as required for all registered nurses, and additional advanced practice credentialing when defined by the state.
In 2004, the member schools in the American Asso-
ciation of Colleges of Nursing (AACN, 2006) voted to endorse the Position Statement on the Practice Doctorate in Nursing. ftis document called for increasing the educa- tional requirement for APRN practice from the master’s level to the doctoral level by 2015. While about 25% of schools of nursing added Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP) programs, they also retained their master’s pro- grams, which enrolled three times as many students as DNP programs did. Further, by 2015, no state board of nursing had adopted the DNP as the standard for entry into APRN practice, and the demand for DNP gradu- ates in the job market was not significantly different than for graduates prepared with a master’s degree (Doctor of Nursing Practice.org, 2020). As a result, with the Master of Science in Nursing (MSN) degree still acceptable to employers while offering the benefit of a less expensive and shorter pathway to advanced practice, the DNP requirement has been slow to be implemented. Cur- rently there are 348 DNP programs enrolling students at schools of nursing nationwide with an additional 98 new DNP programs in the planning stage (AACN, 2019).
fte DNP curriculum was designed to build on tra-
ditional master’s program content by including content on evidence-based practice, quality improvement, systems



leadership, scientific knowledge, and practice expertise to meet the changing demands of our nation’s complex health-care environment. Additionally, the DNP mir- rors the evolution of other health-care professions that have transitioned to doctoral education as an entry into practice including medicine (MD), dentistry (DDS), pharmacy (PharmD), physical therapy (DPT), and psy- chology (PsyD), which all require practice doctorates. Na- tionally, schools of nursing that have initiated the DNP are reporting sizable enrollments, and the demand for DNP-prepared nurses is growing in recognition of the many and significant contributions that these APRNs can make in the practice arena (AACN, 2019). Addition- ally, in a 2018 national survey, APRNs with a DNP were paid, on average, about $7,000 more per year than those with a master’s degree with DNPs earning an average of
$94,000, and those with a master’s degree earing $87,000
(Lippincott Solutions, 2018). According to AACN (2019), the benefits of obtaining a DNP degree include:
• Enhanced knowledge and skills to improve patient outcomes
• Enhanced leadership skills
• Ability to serve as clinical faculty to educate future APRNs
• Development of needed competencies for increasingly
complex clinical, faculty, and leadership roles
Although certification for entry into practice for most APRNs is still allowed for those with only master’s de- grees, the Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anesthesia Education Programs will require the DNP degree as the requirement for certification by 2022, regardless of state licensing requirements (Doctor of Nursing Practice.org, 2020). Widespread adoption of the DNP standard for entry into practice could assist APRNs with their ef- forts to convince state lawmakers to authorize expanded practice authority, autonomy of practice, and clinical privileges.
   fte four major groups of APRNs currently practicing in the United States are certified registered nurse anes- thetists (CRNAs), certified nurse-midwives (CNMs), clinical nurse specialists (CNSs), and nurse practitioners (NPs). fte range of current advanced practice roles and the numbers of nurses in these roles demonstrate the con- tinued success and acceptance of APRNs. (See Table 2.1.) Studies evaluating clinical outcomes of care delivered by


   Table 2.1	
Numbers of Advanced Practice Nurses

Clinical nurse specialists70,000Certified registered nurse anesthetists54,000Certified nurse-midwives12,218Nurse practitioners290,000Source: Adapted from American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2019). Certified registered nurse anesthetists fact sheet. Retrieved from https:// www.aana.com; Miller-Hoover, S. (2020). Year of the nurse: Midwives.
Retrieved from https://www.rn.com/featured-stories/year-of-the-nurse
-midwives/; National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists (2020). Fact sheet. Retrieved from https://www.aana.com; Phillips, S. J. (2020). 32nd annual legislative update. Nurse Practitioner, 45(1), 28–55.


APRNs are overwhelmingly positive as are surveys of pa- tient satisfaction with the care provided by APRNs.
   AACN in collaboration with leaders from the practice environment have supported the creation of a nurse role to enhance care delivery entitled the clinical nurse leader (CNL). fte CNL is an advanced generalist with a mas- ter’s degree. fte CNL oversees care coordination, im- plements evidence-based practice, evaluates outcomes, and functions as part of an interdisciplinary team. fte CNL is not prepared as an APRN but rather comple- ments that role and provides consultation and support (AACN, 2020).
   By accepting the responsibilities of the advanced practice role, APRNs understand the need to expand leg- islative recognition of their professional status, including prescriptive authority and reimbursement for care deliv- ered. Recognition of APRNs in the United States varies with most states providing some level of legal recogni- tion and prescriptive authority.

SCOPE OF PRACTICE


Professional nursing organizations and state boards of nursing understand the need to describe and interpret the responsibilities of advanced practitioners in their areas of specialization. Underlying this need is the ob- ligation to ensure public safety, to identify the essential characteristics of advanced practice, and to interpret



for the practitioner the components of competent care (American Nurses Association, 2020). fte scope of practice may be described by the functions performed by the APRN and the minimal competencies needed to perform those functions. ftese descriptions and guide- lines direct APRNs in the implementation and concep- tualization of their roles and responsibilities.
   In addition, each state has a legislative and regula- tory stance on issues affecting advanced practice within its jurisdiction (Phillips, 2020). fte legal scope of prac- tice, including prerogatives for diagnosing, prescriptive authority, and reimbursement, is described within these regulations. Scope and standards of practice are defined by the professional organization and enacted into law at the state level. fte actual role is further delineated through the recognition of practice responsibilities and activities at the institutional or employment level. Hospi- tals and other health-care organizations typically define role responsibilities and prerogatives through a process of review by practitioners already in the role and then commit the specifics to a contract wherein responsibili- ties, prerogatives, and limitations are made clear. Ideally, the governmental, professional, and institutional per- spectives on practice are congruent. ftis review results in the granting of institutional- or organizational-based practice privileges for the APRN.
Although scope of practice guidelines are important
philosophically and may even have the weight of law, they do not imply that the roles of APRNs are unchang- ing. When knowledge evolves and different care-delivery models emerge, roles also evolve. More commonly, roles change as different practice settings become available and opportunities for improved patient access to care appear. fte nature of advanced practice is broader than individual roles or functions.

Regulation of the Advanced Practice Registered Nurse
Regulation of APRNs occurs at the state level, but there are both educational and certification prereq- uisites. Graduate-level educational preparation of APRNs is guided by educators and members of profes- sional organizations who identify essential curricular goals, content, and competencies expected of APRN graduates.
  
Content and competencies core to all APRNs and those specific to a particular role must be provided in all APRN educational programs. Table 2.2 lists major APRN organizations that develop the educational and certification prerequisites and the APRN essential con- tent and competency documents that direct the prepara- tion of APRNs for entry into practice. On completion of an accredited master’s or doctoral-level program, gradu- ates must pass a national certification examination in the area of intended practice before applying for licensure at the state level.
   APRNs may be recognized and licensed at the state level in one of the four aforementioned roles. However, many issues have been identified with the current reg- ulatory process, particularly eligibility for reciprocity of licensure between states. In response to this need to de- velop more consistent standards for APRN recognition across states, the APRN Consensus Work Group and the National Council of State Boards of Nursing have developed the Consensus Model for APRN Regulation: Li- censure, Accreditation, Certification and Education (2008; 2020). ftis model sought to improve patient access to health care delivered by APRNs, to enable APRN prac- tice across different states, and to establish high standards for APRN certification and license renewal. ftis docu- ment has been accepted by over 40 nursing organizations and stakeholder groups. As a result, most certification credentials did not change but some were changed to clarify the role and population served, whereas other cer- tification categories were retired. fte regulatory model acknowledges the four APRN roles and recommends that advanced practice registered nursing must be regu- lated in one of the four roles and in at least one of six population foci: psychiatric or mental health, women’s health/gender-related, adult-gerontology, pediatrics, neo- natal, and individual families across the life span. fte adult-gerontology and pediatric populations are further distinguished by either an acute care or a primary care focus. Of note, the CNS practice, although specialized in focus, is described to occur across primary and acute care settings and as such must reflect both in their education. Further, the Consensus Model specified completion of a graduate educational program that included completion of three separate courses of advanced pathophysiology, health assessment, and pharmacology with a minimum of 500-precepted clinical hours.


   Table 2.2	
Professional Organizations and Essential Educational Content

OrganizationLandmark PublicationsAmerican Association of Colleges of NursingThe essentials of master’s education in nursing. Washington, DC: Author, 2011.
The essentials of doctoral education for advanced nursing practice. Washington, DC: Author, 2006.
Essentials Task Force, tasked to re-envision all essentials documents to ensure quality in nursing programs offered at the baccalaureate, master’s and doctoral (DNP) levels. Washington, DC: Author, 2020.American College of Nurse-MidwivesCore competencies for basic midwifery practice. Silver Spring, MD: Author, 2012. Competencies for master’s level midwifery education. Silver Spring, MD: Author, 2014. Midwifery education and doctoral education. Silver Spring, MD: Author, 2019.National Association of Nurse Practitioners in Women’s HealthThe women’s health nurse practitioner: Guidelines for practice and education (8th ed.). Washington, DC: Author, 2020.
National Association of Nurse Practitioners in Women’s Health white paper: The essential role of women’s health nurse practitioners. Author, 2020.Council on Accreditation
of Nurse Anesthesia Educa- tional ProgramsStandards for accreditation of nurse anesthesia educational programs. Chicago, IL: Author, 2019.National Association of Clinical Nurse SpecialistsCriteria for the evaluation of clinical nurse specialist master’s, practice doctorate, and post-graduate cer- tificate educational programs. Philadelphia, PA: Author, 2012.
CNS statement for clinical nurse specialist practice and education (CNS statement). Philadelphia, PA: Author, 2019.National Organization of Nurse Practitioner FacultiesCommon advanced practice registered nurse doctoral-level competencies. Washington, DC: Author, 2017.
Adult-gerontological acute care nurse practitioner competencies. Washington, DC: Author, 2016. Adult-gerontological primary care nurse practitioner competencies. Washington, DC: Author, 2013. Population-focused nurse practitioner competencies: Family/Across the lifespan, neonatal, pediat-
ric acute care, pediatric primary care, psychiatric-mental health, women’s health/gender-related.
Washington, DC: Author, 2013.

   Requirements for consistent educational preparation across all APRN roles have provided greater uniformity among programs. fte curricula for all APRNs must include graduate-level courses in advanced pathophys- iology, advanced physical assessment, and advanced pharmacology, called the APRN core (Consensus Model, 2008). In addition, content related to the population served, role development, and clinical experience in the specific role is required. fte Consensus Model has influenced and will continue to influence the licensure, accreditation, certification, and educational preparation of all future APRNs, and the essential characteristics of that model can be found in Table 2.3.

Clinical Nurse Specialist (CNS)
CNSs are nurses with master’s- or doctorate-level education in a defined area of knowledge and practice. ftey typically work in unit- or population-based settings; in hospitals, offices, or outpatient clinic settings; and in community practice. fte American Association of Critical Care Nurses offers CNS certification in Adult-Gerontology, Pediatric, and Neonatal Care (Wellness through Acute Care). Other certifications are available through the American Nurses Credentialing Center. Certification denotes excellence in patient care through system improvements, research, and high-quality nursing practice (AACN, 2020). Many


   Table 2.3	
Essential Characteristics of the Advanced Practice Registered Nurse*

1. Completion of an accredited graduate-level program in one of four areas: nurse-midwifery, nurse anesthesia, NP, or CNS
2. Successful completion of a national certification examination requiring graduate-level education and measuring APRN role and population-of-focus competencies and maintains competence through recertification
3. Possession of advanced clinical knowledge and skills needed for direct patient care and a significant component of education and practice focuses on direct care of individuals
4. Practice builds on RN competencies and demonstrates depth and breadth of knowledge, data synthesis, complex skills, interven- tion, and role autonomy
5. Educational preparation for health promotion and maintenance, assessment, diagnosis, and management of patient problems including use and prescription of pharmacological and nonpharmacological interventions
6. Possesses depth and breadth of clinical experience reflecting intended area of practice
7. Possesses license to practice as an APRN in one of the four APRN roles: CRNA, CNM, CNS, or CNPNote. APRN, advanced practice registered nurse; CNM, certified nurse-midwife; CNP, certified nurse practitioner; CNS, clinical nurse specialist; CRNA, certified registered nurse anesthetist; RN, registered nurse.
*Adapted from Consensus Model for APRN Regulation: Licensure, Accreditation, Certification and Education. (2008). Completed through the work of the APRN Consensus Work Group and the National Council of State Boards of Nursing APRN Advisory Committee. Retrieved from http://www.aacn.nche.edu
/Education/pdf/APRNReport.pdf


states require graduate-level certification as a requisite for practice. CNSs have prescriptive authority in 36 states with some being contingent on physician collaboration/ oversight (Phillips, 2020).
Typical CNS activities include the following:
• Synthesizing, interpreting, making decisions and rec- ommendations, and evaluating responses based on complex, sometimes conflicting, sources of data
• Identifying and prioritizing clinical problems based
on education, research, and experiential knowledge
• Facilitating development of clinical judgment in health-care team members (e.g., nursing staff, medical staff, other health-care providers) through serving as a role model, teaching, coaching, and/or mentoring
• Promoting a caring and supportive environment
• Promoting the value of lifelong learning and evidence-based practice while continually acquiring knowledge and skills needed to address questions aris- ing in practice to improve patient care
• Evaluating current and innovative practices in patient care based on evidence-based practice, research, and experiential knowledge
• Incorporating evidence-based practice guidelines; research; and experiential knowledge to formulate, eval- uate, and/or revise policies, procedures, and protocols

Successful achievement of these results often involves partnerships with physicians and acute care nurse prac- titioners (ACNPs). fte acute care CNS is prepared to function as an expert clinician and patient advocate, a leader in the advancement of nursing practice, and an identifier of opportunities for organization and system changes to enhance patient care (AACN, 2020).
   fte CNS shifts functions depending on the needs of the situation and participates in a mix of direct and indirect patient care activities. Still, the traditional roles of CNS practice remain, including those of ex- pert practitioner, educator, consultant, manager, and researcher.

The Clinical Nurse Specialist and Cost Savings
Multiple studies have demonstrated the positive con- tributions of CNSs to patient care outcomes and pa- tient satisfaction, but fewer studies have evaluated the CNSs’ economic impact and their ability to generate income and save costs. A recent systematic review by Salamanca-Balen et al. (2018) demonstrated that CNS interventions may be effective in reducing specific resource costs such as hospitalization/re-hospitaliza- tion and in decreased length of stay. ftese savings are real, but they may not be returned to the CNS’s home



(usually nursing) department. Because of this, the im- mediate supervisors of CNSs may not appreciate the benefits of expert CNS practice. ftis reality is com- pounded by the inability of CNSs to bill directly for services if they are hospital-based, salaried employees. Skilled advanced practice nursing care is not directly reimbursed and remains bundled in the hospital’s room, food, laundry, and supplies bill. More creative and appropriate financial models that could rem- edy the situation are needed. ftis limitation on role functioning is usually not faced by self-employed or practice-based CNSs, who likely are not institutional employees and who generally work in outpatient or community settings.
The Clinical Nurse Specialist and Evidence-Based Practice (EBP)
CNSs have long been considered change agents; recently, the implementation of EBP is where many CNSs spend their time. CNS involvement in quality initiatives and their contributions to improved patient outcomes have been recognized as agencies apply for Magnet Recogni- tion. fte Magnet Recognition Program® offered by the American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC) recog- nizes health-care organizations for quality patient care, nursing excellence, and innovations in professional nurs- ing practice (Hanson, 2015). fte CNS role is essential to implementing innovation and sustaining improved patient outcomes, which are integral components of the Magnet Recognition Program. fte CNS role broadly and specifically supports the process by which care is delineated, changes are made, and improvements are noted. CNS participation in the attainment of these goals and the movement of organizations toward achiev- ing Magnet status likely will provide new and expanded opportunities for the CNS.
Ambiguity and the Clinical Nurse Specialist Role
Despite the many contributions made by CNSs to im- prove patient care, there remains some ambiguity related to the role. Although CNSs provide valuable patient care, support frontline staff, and drive system change to ensure regulatory compliance, some health-care organi- zations have reduced the number of CNSs employed in their institutions. A possible reason for this reduction may be that CNSs do not generally bill for their services

and therefore do not generate revenue for the employing institution (Tracy, 2015). Research into cost reduction and improvement of patient outcomes should continue in order to document the positive direct and indirect outcomes resulting from CNS interventions across settings.

Nurse Practitioner
NPs are frontline health-care providers essential to devel- oping and maintaining successful communication and collaboration among providers across health-care set- tings. In primary, acute, and specialty care settings, NPs can ensure continuity of care, decrease health-care costs, and optimize health outcomes for patients (Morgan et al., 2019; Villaseñor & Krouse, 2016). NPs are the providers of choice for millions of Americans, and the majority of NPs are prepared to deliver primary care un- like physicians, the majority of whom choose specialty practice. Table 2.4 describes the specialty areas of prac- tice and certification.


   Table 2.4	
Distribution by NP Certification

Certification*Percent of NPsFamily^65.4  Adult^12.6Adult–Gerontology Primary Care^7.8  Acute Care5.5Pediatrics–Primary Care^3.7Adult–Gerontology Acute Care3.4Women’s Health^2.8  Psychiatric/Mental Health–Family^1.8Gerontology^1.7Hospice and Palliative Care1.5Note. * NPs may be certified in more than one area.
^ Primary Care Focus (AANP, 2020).



   fte educational preparation of NPs has evolved from continuing education programs offering certification on completion to university-based graduate programs granting a master’s or doctorate degree in nursing. To- day, NPs are the largest group of APRNs and have pre- scriptive authority in all 50 states and the District of Columbia (Phillips, 2020). In some states, prescriptive authority is contingent on physician collaboration/over- sight. It is estimated that the number of NPs will rise by 244,000 by the year 2025 in order to meet the growing demand for primary care providers (American Academy of Nurse Practitioners [AANP], 2020).
An AACN APRN Doctoral-Level Competencies
work group of over 25 national nursing organizations has developed a document identifying common com- petencies for doctoral-prepared APRNs. These com- petencies are foundational to contemporary APRN practice across all roles and were not intended to replace or negate previously identified competencies but rather to demonstrate a consistent framework that fosters intra- and interprofessional communica- tions (2017).
ftese competencies include:
Domain 1: Patient Care
Designs, delivers, manages, and evaluates comprehensive patient care. Skills include clinical judgment; synthesis; use of therapeutic interventions; and patient, family, and community education and empowerment.
Domain 2: Knowledge of Practice
Synthesizes established and evolving scientific knowl- edge from diverse sources and contributes to the gen- eration, translation, and dissemination of health-care knowledge and practices. Skills include demonstrations of analytic approach, application of science-based theo- ries, and leadership activities focusing on translation and dissemination of evidence into practice.
Domain 3: Practice-Based Learning and Improvement Demonstrates the ability to investigate and evaluate one’s care of patients, to appraise and assimilate emerg- ing scientific evidence, and to continuously improve patient care based on constant self-evaluation and life- long learning. Skills include continuous self-assessment of self-knowledge and need for improvement, use of current evidence to improve practice, use of infor- mation technology to enhance learning, and ongoing

identification and use of knowledge and guidelines to improve outcomes.
Domain 4: Interpersonal and Communication Skills Demonstrates interpersonal and communication skills that result in the effective exchange of information and collaboration with patients, the public, and health pro- fessionals and that promote therapeutic relationships with patients across a broad range of cultural and socio- economic backgrounds. Skills include effective exchange of information with patients; use of tools and techniques that include nonjudgmental attitude, respect, and com- passion to promote therapeutic relationships; and effec- tive use of technology for informing and collaborating with the health-care team.
Domain 5: Professionalism
Demonstrates a commitment to carrying out profes- sional responsibilities and an adherence to ethical prin- ciples. Skills include accountability; integrity; delivery of ethical care in compliance with laws, policies, and regu- lations; mentoring of students, peers, and health team members; commitment to the nursing profession; and advocacy for patients and populations with social justice and equity.
Domain 6: Systems-Based Practice
Demonstrates organizational and systems leadership to improve health-care outcomes. Skills include collab- oration in systems-level strategies to reduce errors and optimize safe health care; demonstrate stewardship of financial and other resources to ensure quality and af- fordability; shaping health-care policy at local, state, and national levels to optimize outcomes.
Domain 7: Interprofessional Collaboration
Demonstrates the ability to engage in an interprofessional team in a manner that optimizes safe, effective patient- and population-centered care. Skills include promotion of respect, dignity, inclusion, civility, and trust in the health-care team; team leadership to address complex is- sues, advocacy for the role of patient as a member of the health-care team, and assumption of the leader/member role to provide and improve patient-centered care.
Domain 8: Personal and Professional Development Demonstrates the qualities required to sustain lifelong per- sonal and professional growth. Skills include demonstra- tion of healthy coping mechanisms; flexibility and maturity



in response to changing professional environments; and demonstration of leadership, trustworthiness, and self- assurance to inspire confidence of patients and colleagues.
Changing Roles for the Primary Care Nurse Practitioner
Initially, patient populations cared for by NPs were often uninsured immigrants or low-income individuals who were Medicaid recipients. However, NPs since then have sought to meet the needs of larger groups of patients and have expanded their practices to include clients from suburban and urban outpatient settings and clinics. ftis shift to highly populated, high-income areas where physicians are also readily available shows the increased acceptance of NPs.
Retail and Urgent Care Clinics
fte development of walk-in, retail, and urgent care clin- ics has changed the landscape for accessing primary care services. ftese clinics are major employers of NPs and thus provide an opportunity to showcase to the public some of the care that NPs can provide. According to the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) Web site, as of 2015, 2,000 retail clinics operate in 41 states and Washington, DC, providing care to more than 35 million patients (NCSL, 2017). Recognizing the po- tential impact of these clinics on the APRNs, the AANP published Standards for Nurse Practitioner Practice in Retail-Based Clinics (AANP, 2013).
Nurse Practitioners in the Community
Primary care NPs have established unique community- centered practice models. In an effort to develop an independent NP service model and to study the ways that health care is delivered to various populations in the United States, many schools of nursing opened Ac- ademic Community Nursing Centers (Emami et al., 2017; Naylor & Kurtzman, 2010). ftese centers are used as settings in which to study how health care is pro- vided to vulnerable populations with limited access to care who face inefficiencies and a lack of coordination in health-care delivery; to determine the specific needs of the community in which the center is located; and to provide a means of improving the quality of the care delivered. Although largely successful, collaboration and engagement of some schools of nursing and academic

health centers have been hampered by structural, man- agerial, and sociocultural barriers (Emami et al., 2017).
  fte NP as consultant in community health settings is another emerging advanced practice role. ftis role in- volves outreach and public education while developing programs and services to support community-residing persons to engage in healthy lifestyles. Typical activities include organizing clinical outreach programs (flu shot clinics), developing media and literature to distribute health information, conducting interviews and surveys for community assessment of need, and developing solutions to improve community access to health-care services. Knowledge of cultural and demographic issues and ability to coordinate a multidisciplinary health pro- fessional team are essential skills needed to directly influ- ence and improve public health.
Pediatric Nurse Practitioners
Societal changes also affect the care of children. Child abuse continues to be one of the nation’s most serious concerns. fte Centers for Disease Control and Preven- tion (CDC) reports that at least one in seven children has experienced abuse or neglect during the past year, and this is most probably an underestimate (CDC, 2020). Adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) are more likely to occur in homes with substance misuse, mental health problems, and instability due to parental separation. Childhood immunization is also a top health priority in the United States. Some parents have become “vaccine hesitant” and have chosen to withhold some or all rou- tine vaccinations for their children. In 2019, the United States had more than 1,200 cases of measles, representing the greatest number of cases since 1992 (CDC, 2019a). Additional serious issues for children include obesity, bul- lying, and adolescent suicide (CDC, 2019b). fte need for appropriately prepared pediatric NPs is urgent. fte Institute of Pediatric Nursing (IPN, 2020) estimates that 16% of NPs and 8.7% of CNSs specialize in pediatrics. fte opportunities for APRNs to care for our nation’s chil- dren in primary care and specialized clinics are abundant.
The Psychiatric and Mental Health Nurse Practitioner
In the 1950s, the APRN role of the psychiatric and mental health nurse was conceptualized as a CNS role. With developments in the science underpinning mental



health and psychiatric illnesses, emphasis shifted from a traditional psychosocial approach to a biopsychoso- cial paradigm of care. In the latter model, psychophar- macology assumed a prominent place in the treatment inventory. Acceptance of this movement was demon- strated by the development of national certification examinations for the psychiatric and mental health NP. Initially, there were two examinations available—adult and family (American Nurses Credentialing Center [ANCC], 2016). With the adoption of the Consensus Model (2008), the psychiatric and mental health APRN shifted to a focus on the individual across the life span. Prescriptive authority is available for CNSs for indepen- dent practice in 28 states and independent prescriptive authority in 19 states (National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists [NACNS], 2020).
Women’s Health/Gender-Related Nurse Practitioners
fte women’s health/gender-related NP role grew out of identification of the unique health-care needs of women and initially focused on family planning, infertility, sex- ual dysfunction, gynecological care, perimenopausal issues, and the diagnosis and treatment of sexually trans- mitted infections (STIs) throughout the life span. Be- cause of low income and the lack of resources available to many women, the role expanded to include well-woman health with a focus on holistic care, disease prevention and healthy lifestyles, mental health issues, and iden- tification of issues such as intimate partner violence. fte women’s health NP also focuses on common uro- logical problems such as incontinence and cystitis and performs procedures such as cystoscopy, intrauterine de- vice (IUD) insertion, endometrial biopsy, and obstetrical ultrasonography.
Over the years, these practitioners recognized a lack
of providers to address men’s sexual and reproductive health needs. ftus, the education and role of the wom- en’s health NP expanded to include the diagnosis of, screening for, and evaluation and management of men’s health issues such as STIs and infertility. In recognition of the effectiveness of these women’s health practitioners, the Consensus Model (2008) calls for women’s health practitioners to expand their population focus. fte National Association of Nurse Practitioners in Women’s Health (NPWH) has developed specific competencies to

address the special needs of male partners; these include issues such as assessing general health as well as sexual and reproductive fertility risk factors, testing for STIs, performing circumcisions, and providing reproductive and birth control counseling (NPWH, 2020).
   Women’s health NPs have recently expanded into general primary care practices that need a clinician to focus on women’s health issues. In 2018, the NPWH developed the BOlder Women’s Health Coalition to fo- cus on policy, clinical education, public education, and research to promote the health and wellness of older women. fte mental and physical health threats unique to age are emphasized along with an advocacy focus to address economic challenges facing older women (NPWH, 2020).
Acute Care Nurse Practitioner
fte ACNP describes pediatric and adult-gerontology nurses wishing to care for patients who are physiologi- cally unstable, technologically dependent, and/or highly vulnerable to complications. ftese ACNPs meet the needs of their patients by providing them with a spec- trum of care from disease prevention to acute care man- agement (AANP, 2020).
   ACNPs are no longer defined by the geographical set- ting in which they provide care but by the patient pop- ulation they serve. ftey may be practice based, such as those working on a cardiothoracic service, or unit based, such as those working in a medical intensive care unit (ICU) or cardiac step-down unit. ftey may also be on teams that provide care across settings, such as those in hospitalist positions, or on consultative teams, such as acute diabetes management services. ftese new practice areas demonstrate the diversity of practice opportunities available to meet the needs of acutely ill patients.
Neonatal Nurse Practitioner
fte neonatal NP (NNP) role involves collaboration with physicians and nursing staff to provide comprehen- sive critical care to the infants in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) (National Association of Neonatal Nurses [NANN], 2020). About 40,000 infants of low birth weight are born yearly, and it is anticipated that the demand for neonatal nurses will grow at a rate higher than average over the next few years (Nurse Journal, 2020). NNPs deliver immediate neonatal intensive care,



including technology to assist breathing, and moni- tor critical life functioning. Essential skills include the ability to handle stress, attention to detail, and skilled communication because some of these infants will not survive or may survive with significant health challenges.
The Pediatric Acute Care Nurse Practitioner
fte pediatric ACNP was a relatively late arrival to the NP workforce. ftis was due in part to the strong role of CNSs in pediatric settings. When the role of ACNP first started, it was a blended role of the CNS and NP in an attempt to provide comprehensive services and direct patient care to pediatric patients and their families. Now the APRN roles in pediatric acute care are distinctly separate.
   With implementation of the Consensus Model (2008), CNSs and NPs must be certified distinctly in one of these roles based on their educational preparation and eligibility for licensure in the state in which they practice. fte many responsibilities of the APRN in pedi- atrics include such activities as performing health histo- ries and physical examinations; evaluating clinical data; prescribing treatments; performing invasive procedures, such as tracheal intubation and insertion of arterial lines; educating and supporting patients and families; facilitat- ing patient discharge; participating in interdisciplinary rounds; and providing consultative services regarding such issues as wound care and infant feeding problems (Reuter-Rice et al., 2016).
fte pediatric ACNP can be found on specific patient
care units such as the medical-surgical floor or the ICU; can function in the hospitalist role; or can be a mem- ber of a specialty service such as cardiology, pulmonary, oncology, transplantation, gastrointestinal, and general surgery (Reuter-Rice et al., 2016). Pediatric ACNPs may also work outside the hospital setting in other areas in which acutely ill pediatric patients are found. Such areas include long-term acute care centers, centers for the management of mechanically ventilated patients, transport services, and home settings (Reuter-Rice et al., 2016).
  fte role that each NP assumes depends largely on the specific needs of the patients cared for. fte focus of the role, regardless of the geographical location in which the pediatric ACNP works, is to provide cost- effective and high-quality patient care.

Adult Gerontology Acute Care Nurse Practitioners
Acknowledging the aging of the American public and the need to properly educate providers who can meet the multifaceted needs of older adults, the crafters of the Consensus Model (2008) explicitly changed the popula- tion focus of adult care NPs to adult gerontology. With this significant emphasis on the needs of older adults, educational programs had to revise their curricula to clearly address the competency requirements of the adult gerontology patient across the adult age continuum, and certifying bodies had to change their examinations to cover the breadth of knowledge required to implement the role.
Similar to the roles of their pediatric counterparts,
the roles of adult-gerontology ACNPs (AGACNPs) are evolving and expanding throughout the acute care setting. AGACNPs are found in traditional care set- tings such as emergency departments, ICUs, step-down or progressive care units, and medical-surgical floors. Adult-gerontology ACNPs also deliver care to patients outside the tertiary or quaternary care institutions in settings such as outpatient surgical centers, centers for the management of mechanically ventilated patients, long-term acute care hospitals, psychiatric evaluation centers, dialysis units, heart failure centers, and correc- tional facilities. AGACNPs care for patients based on their acuity and health status rather than the setting in which they are receiving care.
AGACNPs practice in specialty care areas such as car-
diology, pulmonary, and specialized neurology settings, hematology and oncology, specialty ear-nose-throat (ENT) services, a variety of surgery services, palliative care, pain management services, and others. New areas of practice for ACNPs include hospitalist roles, palliative and hospice care, and roles in physician private practices.
Adult-Gerontology Acute Care Nurse Practitioners in Specialty Practices
In tertiary health-care centers, further reductions in medical residents’ work hours have contributed to frag- mented care and a shortage of providers. fte AGACNP can provide much-needed stability and continuity, which is known to produce positive patient outcomes. Complex settings, where continuous follow-up of patients is nec- essary, are ideal practice areas for AGACNPs. AGACNPs can make a positive impact on the health-care delivery



system by providing a continuous and comprehensive approach to the management of their patients’ needs.
Advanced Oncology Certified Nurse Practitioner
Oncology is one specialty area in which NP expertise for continuous and comprehensive care is crucial. Oncology settings span the cancer trajectory from high-risk cancer clinics to hospice and palliative care (Oncology Nursing Credentialing Corporation [ONCC], 2020). Advanced oncology certified nurse practitioners (AOCNPs) bring a unique holistic perspective that enables them to pro- vide expert care with issues such as pain management, symptom palliation, and sensitivity to the psychologi- cal aspects of a cancer diagnosis. NP roles in oncology are varied and can include outpatient roles in radiation therapy, chemotherapy, surgical clinics (preoperative and postoperative global care), palliative care, survivorship and prevention, and genetic counseling related to cancer risk. ftese NPs can also be found in ICUs as well as medical or surgical oncology units. Because of the Con- sensus Model, there are no longer stand-alone oncology NP programs. NPs must be prepared as either primary care or ACNPs and then can complete additional train- ing and obtain specialty certification in oncology.
fte National Cancer Institute reports 1,806,590 new
cancer cases and 606,620 cancer deaths in 2020 with the lifetime risk of developing cancer of any site being 39.5% for the average American. fte need for highly skilled APRNs to care for cancer patients is apparent, and the demand is expected to continue to grow in the coming decades (National Cancer Institute [NCI], 2020).

The Certified Nurse-Midwife (CNM)
Certified nurse-midwives (CNMs) are registered nurses who are primary health-care providers to women through- out the life span. ftey perform physical examinations; prescribe medications, including contraceptive methods; order laboratory tests as needed; and provide prenatal care, gynecological care, and labor and birth care as well as health education and counseling to women of all ages. According to the American College of Nurse-Midwives (ACNM) position statement, Mandatory Degree Require- ments for Entry into Midwifery Practice, a graduate degree is required for entry into midwifery practice (ACNM,

2020b). Midwifery education programs provide the nec- essary education for graduates to be eligible to take the examination offered by the American Midwifery Certifica- tion Board (AMCB) and become CNMs. fte Accredi- tation Commission for Midwifery Education (ACME) (formerly the ACNM Division of Accreditation [DOA]) assesses the quality and content of midwifery education programs and ensures that they reflect the ACNM core competencies.
  fte ACNM has mandated graduate-level educa- tion for entry into midwifery clinical practice since 2010. In the past, master’s programs predominated in nurse-midwifery preparation; however, many programs have discontinued their master’s degree option and now offer only a DNP, whereas some continue to offer the master’s degree (ACNM, 2020b).
   Nurse-midwifery is recognized in all 50 states, al- though it is regulated by various agencies in the different states and has varying scopes of practice from state to state. fte main scope of practice issue has to do with in- dependent versus collaborative practice with physicians. Physician practices and outpatient care centers (23%) continue to be identified as the primary employers of nurse-midwives (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019). For CNMs practicing in hospital settings, clinical privi- leges may be granted through membership in the medi- cal staff or through other privileging routes. fte purpose of requiring institutional credentialing and practice privileges is to ensure that CNMs provide patient care within the parameters of professional practice that are consistent with national standards and state regulations (ACNM, 2020b).
Benefits of receiving midwifery care include de-
creased rates of cesarean sections, decreased risk of preterm birth, lower costs for patients and insurers, and increased satisfaction with the quality of care (ACNM, 2020a). CNMs believe in facilitating natural childbirth as much as possible and often perform deliveries in a private and comfortable birthing center or in the home (American Pregnancy Association, 2020). In addition, CNMs have advocated for women for years. An excit- ing program started by the ACNM is the Healthy Birth Initiative (n.d.). fte goal of this project is to provide resources and tools to help women, their families, and health-care providers to achieve a healthy childbirth. ftis initiative also provides evidence-based research to



quality managers to meet their mandate for improved birth care in hospitals.
Primary Care Focus in Nurse-Midwifery
As CNMs provided obstetrical care to women throughout their childbearing years, they realized that many women did not have access to primary care services. In a natural progression, women began to seek primary health care from the health-care provider they had trusted during their pregnancies and births; thus, nurse-midwives began to provide care to perimenopausal and postmenopausal women, a natural expansion of their scope of practice. With the aging of the U.S. population, the number of women approaching menopause is growing. Large numbers of women are expected to seek menopausal and postmenopausal care from CNMs. In response to this change in demographics and the need for greater access to primary care providers, CNMs have expanded their scope of practice to include provision of primary care to women across the life span from adolescence to beyond menopause with a special emphasis on pregnancy, child- birth, and gynecological and reproductive health.
While CNMs attend births, over 50% also provide
reproductive and primary care in their practices, includ- ing annual examinations, primary care, patient educa- tion, and nutrition counseling (ACNM, 2020a).
  fte scope of practice for CNMs also includes treat- ment of male partners for STIs and reproductive health as well as care of the normal newborn during the first 28 days of life (ACNM, 2020a). Interestingly, this scope of practice reflects the changes in the Consensus Model: the shift from women’s health to women’s health/gender- related care. CNMs continue to focus on midwifery so as to not lose the essence of nurse-midwifery practice, while acknowledging those aspects of primary care that are part of the services offered to patients and their families.
Issues Related to Primary Care Practice
CNMs provide primary and preventive care in clinics and other outpatient settings. fte ACNM calls for care delivered by CNMs to include all essential factors of primary care and case management. ftis focus on the ambulatory care of women and newborns emphasizes health promotion, education, and disease prevention and identifies women as central in providing this care (ACNM, 2020a). CNMs have also focused on the care

of adolescent women, noting that this group is largely medically underserved.
Nurse-Midwife as First Assistant for Cesarean Section
Another role of the CNM that has grown is that of the surgical first assistant. Because of obstetrical residency programs across the nation closing and cost-containment initiatives resulting in fewer physicians available to serve as first assistants, CNMs have expanded their roles to fill the gap (ftarpe, 2015). Additionally, because in many cases the CNM is already present at the time of an emer- gency cesarean section, a delivery can progress without interruption, resulting in better outcomes for both the mother and the newborn, when the CNM is prepared as a surgical first assistant. fte Association for Perioperative Registered Nurses (AORN) issued a position statement specifying that perioperative nursing is a specialized area of practice and that those with a license to practice as an APRN in one of the four APRN roles who wish to function in an expanded perioperative nursing role as a first assistant will require additional specialized educa- tion (AORN, 2020).

Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist
CRNAs are APRNs licensed as independent prac- titioners who plan and deliver anesthesia and who manage pain through drugs and procedures across the life span (AANA, 2020a). Sometimes called nurse an- esthesiologists, they practice in hospitals, nonoperating room anesthetizing areas, ambulatory surgical centers, and office-based settings with authority to practice in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. Currently,
17 states have opted out of the federal physician supervision requirement. Some states, however, require physician supervision, increasing costs and barriers to in- dependent practice. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) temporarily removed physician supervision requirements of CRNAs to increase health-care capacity. Nurse leaders are lobbying to permanently remove the supervision re- quirements for CRNAs (AANA, 2020b).
   Nurse anesthetists provide a significant amount of the anesthesia given for surgical procedures in the United States. ftey administer all types of anesthesia and provide



anesthesia-related care in the following categories: prean- esthetic preparations and evaluation; anesthesia induc- tion, maintenance, and emergence; postanesthesia care; and perianesthetic and clinical support. Congressional legislation passed in 1986 allowed CRNAs to be the first nursing specialty to receive direct reimbursement under the Medicare program (AANA, 2020a).
   ftese APRNs work in urban and rural settings; and in some states, CRNAs are the sole anesthesia profes- sionals in nearly 100% of rural hospitals (AANA, 2020b). It is estimated that CRNAs and student CRNAs provide approximately 49 million anesthetics annually in the United States. Compared with anesthesiologists, CRNAs are more likely to work in areas with lower me- dian income and larger populations of uninsured or un- derinsured patients. Additionally, CRNAs are assuming a critical role in chronic pain management with an em- phasis on opioid alternatives including nerve blocks and the administration of lidocaine (AANA, 2020c).
A Cochrane review of outcomes studies conducted
between 2015 and 2017 was performed to compare pa- tient outcomes between physician- and APRN-led teams delivering primary care (Laurant et al., 2018). fte re- view found that patient outcomes of care provided by CRNAs was equal to—and in some ways better than— care provided by physicians alone for inpatient popula- tions and those in community settings. fte review found that APRN care resulted in slightly fewer deaths among certain patients, improved blood pressure control, and higher levels of patient satisfaction. Although this study provided no specific conclusions regarding CRNA pa- tient outcomes, other studies have shown CRNA patient outcomes to be comparable with those of anesthesiolo- gists. Using national data for 443,000 Medicare patients undergoing surgery, perioperative patient outcomes were evaluated including mortality, length of stay, and inpa- tient costs. No significant differences were found when CRNAs were or were not supervised by anesthesiologists (Sun et al., 2018).
fte AANA serves as the guiding professional organi-
zation for CRNAs, setting the educational and certifica- tion standards and promulgating a code of ethics for CRNAs (AANA, 2020a) along with the scope of nurse anesthesia practice. Nurse anesthetist students must enroll in schools accredited by the AANA and upon graduation must successfully complete a certification

examination. Beginning January 1, 2022, all students matriculating into an accredited program must be en- rolled in a doctoral program (AANA, 2020b). As of August 2016, they must also participate in mandatory Continued Professional Certification (CPC) every  4 years through the National Board on Certification and Recertification of Nurse Anesthetists (NBCRNA) that includes 100 hours of accredited continuing education and core modules. A CPC assessment is required every 8 years. ftis assessment identifies any areas in need of additional study and is not a pass/fail examination that impacts certification (NBCRNA, 2020).

AN EMERGING PRACTICE AREA FOR ALL APRNs: HOSPICE AND PALLIATIVE CARE


As the number of individuals in the United States with life-limiting and serious illnesses increases, there is a need to increase palliative care services that can help to improve access to care and quality of life, increase patient and family satisfaction, and contain costs. In 2014, the authors of the IOM’s report Dying in America: Improving Quality and Honoring Individual Preferences Near the End of Life made recommendations that included increasing access to care for our aging population (Meghani & Hinds, 2015). Currently, at least 12 million adults and 400,000 children are living with a serious disease such as cancer, heart disease, kidney failure, and/or dementia. By 2035, the number of people over age 65, 81% of whom live with multiple chronic conditions, will approach 78 million and will overwhelm our traditional health- care system (Center to Advance Palliative Care, 2019). Palliative care is appropriate at any age and any stage of serious illness and can be provided along with curative treatment.
APRNs have stepped up to try to fill the need in
this growing area. Palliative care APRNs can be found across settings, including inpatient, outpatient, skilled nursing and rehabilitation facilities, and in the home. Although one typically thinks of these specialists work- ing in primary care and oncology, there has been a shift to increase access to palliative care for patients with other life-limiting illnesses such as neurological and cardio- pulmonary disease. All APRNs have a role in palliative care. As nurses first, APRNs have always focused on and



excelled in symptom management, assessing patients’ re- sponses to treatments, and ascertaining patients’ goals. CNSs and NPs are the roles many people think of as being the “typical” palliative care provider; however, the palliative care APRN can also be a CNM, because these professionals are skilled in managing individuals through life transitions, pain, and anxiety, or a nurse anesthetist, who may participate in palliative sedation (Van Hoover & Holt, 2016; Wolf, 2013). Certification as an advanced practice hospice and palliative nurse (ACHPN), often a job requirement for this specialty area, is available for the CNS and the NP through the Hospice and Palliative Nurses Association (2020). Cur- rent requirements include functioning as a CNS or an NP with 500 hours of hospice or palliative care advanced nursing in the last 12 months or 1,000 hours in the last 24 months. Transcripts from the graduate program com- pleted must include courses in physical assessment, ad- vanced pathophysiology, and advanced pharmacology as well as a clinical practicum.


FUTURE DIRECTIONS FOR ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSES

APRNs are thriving, as shown in the increased num- bers of practitioners, in the expansion of practice roles and settings, in the opportunity for independent prac- tice without physician collaboration or supervision, and with the support of major health-care organizations. For example, the Veterans Healthcare Association endorses the use of APRNs throughout its health-care network (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 2016). It is esti- mated that about two thirds (67%) of the practitioners added to the health-care workforce between 2016 and 2030 will be advanced practice nurses or physician as- sistants (Auerbach et al., 2020). fte research and data collected over the past 3 decades have been helpful in identifying some key insights that may guide us forward into our future. Some of these key beliefs are worth revisiting:
• fte most important thing about advanced practice nursing is being a nurse.
• Core mastery and competency are required in all
aspects of the nursing process.
• 
Development of leadership skill and expertise is im- perative, and seeing other members of the health-care team as adversaries is not productive.
• As we move forward and continue to advocate for full
practice privilege and autonomy, we must keep politi- cally informed and active (Edmunds, 2018).
fte National Academy of Medicine (NAM) has formed an expert committee to extend the vision for the future of nursing into 2030 and to help all nurses chart a path to create a national culture of health, reduce health dis- parities, and consider these issues within the context of the COVID-19 pandemic (NAM, 2020). fte commit- tee will examine current and future challenges resulting from changes in clinical care, nursing education and leadership, and community partnerships developed as a result of the pandemic. fte committee will consider:
• fte role of nurses caring for individuals, families, and communities by addressing the social determinants of health including access to care and system facilitators and barriers.
• Deployment of all levels of nurses across the contin-
uum, including collaborative practice models to build a culture of health.
• Development of a nursing workforce that is diverse,
including gender, race, and ethnicity, across all levels of nursing education.
• Education and training utilizing competency devel-
opment to prepare APRNs to work outside the acute care setting and lead efforts to build a culture of health and equity and evaluate the extent that the current curriculum meets these needs.
• fte ability of nurses to serve as change agents, re-
searchers, and leaders in health care to eliminate dis- parities and gaps.
• fte importance of nurse well-being and resilience
ensuring the delivery of high-quality health care in response to emergencies that arise from natural and man-made disasters that impact health equity.
fte COVID-19 pandemic has shown a spotlight on weaknesses inherent in our health-care delivery sys- tem. Rural hospitals have closed at historic high rates, and many hospital systems have found that they are under-resourced, lacking frontline providers across the spectrum of care (AANA, 2019). As the virus spread,



the federal government suspended the CMS supervi- sion requirement for CRNAs and other APRNs. It is hoped that this suspension will provide the data needed to support a permanent change in those states still re- quiring physician supervision and oversight and allow all APRNs to practice to the full extent of their educational preparation.
   ftere will continue to be a growing need for health care in the years to come, and APRNs are vital to the delivery and the evolution of health-care services, health

promotion, and community education. Many areas of the United States lack quality primary and specialty health-care services, and APRNs will be needed to pro- vide these essential services. Our overall goals of im- proved access to care, cost reduction, patient protection and quality improvement, and community engagement will provide the impetus for APRNs to grow and develop clinical competency, leadership, and visibility as we craft new and equitable relationships within the health-care system.















Role Development
A Theoretical Perspective
Lucille A. Joel




Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Explain structural-functionalist and symbolic-interactionist theories and how they influence role adjustment.
• Define reference groups and distinguish among normative, comparison, and audi-
ence groups.
• Evaluate role-taking and role-making in the workplace and explain the role of so- cialization in these processes.
• Explain the nature of second-order change and how it leads to the development of
new behaviors.
• Apply the skill acquisition model to nursing (Benner, 2001; Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1977).
• Describe setbacks experienced by new role expectations.
• Justify the need for anticipatory socialization during the educational process.
• Discuss challenges to socialization in the advanced practice nurse (APN) role.
• Distinguish stress and strain.






34



A nurse’s role is constantly changing. ftere is no role that a nurse will serve exclusively for the entire life of a career. Role modifications depend on a theoretical body of knowledge, based on more hypothetical than empiri- cal research. ftese concepts and relationships allow the nurse to make a comfortable paradigm shift as necessary and maintain a sense of continuity from here to there.

A THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVE ON ROLE: AN OVERVIEW

ftere are two diametrically opposed theoretical perspectives in the behavioral sciences that provide a context for the study of role performance: structural-functionalist theory and symbolic-interactionist theory. Structural-functionalist theory is based on the assumption that roles are more or less fixed within the society to which they are attached and that opportunities for individuals to alter patterns of social interaction are limited. In contrast, symbolic- interactionist theory proposes the more individualistic perspective, that people do not merely learn responses but organize and interpret cues in the environment and choose those to which they wish to react.
Structural-functionalist theory subordinates the indi-
vidual to the society; it is deductive in its analysis of role. All situations that arise within a society do so because they fill a social need. One such example is the division of labor. fte more complex a society, the more differen- tiated its labor source will become, readjusting and re- constructing over time. Specialization is guaranteed, and associates and assistants share in a domain of the work. ftis concept is dramatically displayed by the division of labor and reordered roles within the health-care delivery system, each role creating its own cadre of technologists, technicians, associates, and assistants. Why should nurs- ing be different?
Altruism also plays a major part here because individ-
uals subordinate their will to the social order. fte social forces in a given society validate the roles and the associ- ated behaviors of the individual. Consensual validation is the vehicle for both the maintenance and change of these norms. In many instances, norms are codified by govern- ment; in others, they continue to exist in veritable limbo, changing or resisting change according to time and place. A continuing debate exists about the relationship

between the fixed norms of a society and the individual’s perception of those norms. Often there is no route to interpretation of the social norm except cues offered by others in the situation, and often those cues may be mis- leading. From another perspective, where may noncon- formity be tolerated, to what degree, and in what areas of social participation? Examples abound both profession- ally and in life. Consider for a moment the immigrant family whose children are schooled in the United States and socialized to the prevailing culture in this country. Are their new ways accepted at home and to what ex- tent? Must they change the way a chameleon does from place to place or jeopardize belonging or perhaps even sustenance? To what extent can advanced practice nurses (APNs) feel confident in establishing their personally preferred values, attitudes, and behaviors in a new role or employment situation? See Box 3.1 for cues that may predict limits on flexibility in defining role behaviors.




Cues That May Predict Limits on Flexibility in Defining Role BehaviorsHighly precise and detailed job descriptions Management by memorandum in situations in which
   personal communication would have sufficed Guarded interdisciplinary boundaries that hamper
smooth operation
A hierarchy that is an obstacle to work rather than a facilitator
Policies, procedures, and documentation systems that are cumbersome and even inconsistent with current practice
Absence of staff nurse autonomy in caring for patients
Organizational relationships designed for supervi- sion as opposed to reporting
Absence of inventiveness and creativity Verbalized discontent from staff but no evidence
   of any attempt to change things High turnover rate among employees
Maintenance of a “screen” for attitudes, values, and behaviors not supported by historic antecedents


   In contrast, the symbolic-interactionist view empha- sizes the meaning that symbols hold for actors in the process of role development, rather than the constraints presumed to be exerted by the social structure. fte inter- actionist sees the formation of role identity as inductive and complex. fte role is a creative adaptation to the so- cial environment and the result of the reciprocal interac- tion of individuals. It is the product of self-conception and the perspective of generalized others. To facilitate communication, symbols are essential and they must be social and hold the same meaning for each actor in the process. In other words, self-identity is shaped by the reflected appraisals of others, and it is desirable that individuals’ self-perception should be highly congruent with the way they are perceived by others and the way they see themselves as being perceived by others. Should these pieces show a poor fit, an individual could waste a lifetime of effort creating evidence that justifies their personal view of self.
Many have rejected the structuralist approach because
it seems limited in accounting for the wide variation in roles and behaviors that we see today. Yet, it is impossible to ignore the effect that the culture and the “collective conscience” have on our development of identity and role behaviors. ftere is recent interest in building con- ceptual frameworks that are inclusive of both the interac- tionist and the structural perspectives and that promise a greatly enlarged understanding of role development. ftis eclecticism characterizes this chapter’s discussion.

ROLE DEVELOPMENT

fte concept of reference groups and the process of so- cialization are central to role development. Reference groups are the frame of reference for the process of so- cialization. ftrough socialization, individual behavior is shaped to conform to the standard of the group in which one chooses to seek membership.

Reference Groups
Reference groups convey a standard of normative be- havior in terms of values, attitudes, knowledge, and skills. For an individual, this may be a group to which they belong or aspire to belong. In moving toward a standard

that is either consciously or unconsciously desired, dis- cussion of several reference groups is in order, including normative groups, comparison groups, and audience groups. fte normative group sets explicit standards and expects compliance, and it rewards or punishes relative to that degree of compliance. fte church, community, and family are good examples of normative groups. fte behaviors that are expected may have wide or narrow lat- itude, but somewhere there is a “bottom line.”
  fte comparison group sets its own standards and becomes a comparison group only when an individual accepts it as such. fte nursing staff of a Magnet facility may be a comparison group, demonstrating longevity in employment and satisfaction with work, seeking upward mobility through education, and so on. fte nursing staff and their leadership in other facilities may aspire to these qualities, making it a comparison group for them.
  fte audience group is a collective group whose at- tention an individual wishes to attract. fte audience group holds certain values but does not demand compli- ance from the person for whom they serve as a referent. In fact, the audience group may not even be aware of this individual. To be recognized, the individual takes note of the group’s values and plays to that audience for attention. Staff nurses may observe that physicians value being able to proceed with the treatment of their patients unencumbered by the bureaucratic constraints of health care. Administrators are overwhelmed by the cost factors in health care. Nurses are best positioned if they are aware of these values and attitudes and try to minimize the obstacles they represent to these groups. In other words, they play to the audience through either word or deed.

Socialization
Socialization refers to the learning of the values, atti- tudes, knowledge, and skills that enable the behavior prescribed for a specific social position or role. fte fact that these components are society-specific indicates that there are social norms involved. Values are ideas held in common by members of a social structure that prioritize goals and objectives. Values are generally the abstract but relatively stable aspects of a person’s belief system. Atti- tude is the tendency to respond to social objects or events in a favorable or unfavorable way. Opinion is defined as



expressed attitude. Behaviors are observable social acts performed by an individual. Attitudes guide judgment and subsequently behavior, but this assumption of a rela- tionship between attitude and behavior is controversial. Operationally, the concept of socialization refers to individuals acquiring the necessary knowledge and skills, as well as internalizing and shaping the values and at- titudes of a particular social system, in preparation for fulfilling a specific role in that system. ftis process is no less true for the roles of nurse and APN than it is for the role of parent or spouse. Further, whereas some roles or statuses have highly specific role prescriptions, others are extremely vague and open to wide variation of interpretation. ftis latitude may be observed in the setting in which the role is played out or the society in which it is placed, or both. Harmony among these sys- tems enhances role execution. ftere is often significant discrepancy between the public, professional, legal, and institutional definitions of the role of the nurse. Even if the society and role occupant are bound by the legal role as defined, discrepancies among the other definitions cause problems in recruitment, retention, job satisfac-
tion, and more.
   Socialization is a continuous and cumulative process that evolves over time through role-taking and role- making, both of which are techniques of role bargain- ing. Social behavior is not simply a learned response. It depends on the processes of interaction and commu- nication. To be successful, role-taking requires skill in empathic communication. fte individual must project themself into the circumstances of another and then step back to imagine how they would feel in the other’s situ- ation. If there is accurate determination of the motives and feelings of the other, the actor can modify their own behavior to sustain or alter the other’s response. fte pro- cess here is unidirectional. For example, the APN “reads” their peers and supervisor as seeing staff development as the major focus of the APN role, although the APN may have preferred to carry a significant personal caseload of the most complex patients. Staff development is accepted as the priority, but the APN takes on the most complex cases as vehicles for teaching at every opportunity.
Put another way, the less desirable activities are ac-
commodated (first-order change) and even eventually assimilated (second-order change), becoming an integral part of the role. First-order changes are behavioral shifts

that do not permanently achieve a desired result. Old preferences keep returning in the way antagonists do because we shift our behaviors but not the core values or attitudes causing the behaviors. Second-order changes are permanent attitude shifts that cause new behaviors (Watzlawick et al., 2011). fte “old ways” stay gone and are not replaced by a new version (such as giving up alco- hol and starting a nicotine or work addiction).
   In contrast, role-making is bidirectional and inter- active with both actors presenting behaviors that are interpreted reciprocally for the purpose of creating and modifying their own roles. ftis process is analogous to a dance with each partner seeking to complement the other while maintaining their own uniqueness. For ex- ample, the APN notices surprise from the physician when suggesting a modification in treatment for a pa- tient. fte APN supplies cogent and sophisticated rea- soning, and the physician agrees although skeptical of this behavior. Over time, the physician becomes com- fortable with the APN’s prescriptions and actually looks for the clinical input. Both role-taking and role-making depend on success in reading role partners correctly. ftis skill is enhanced by broad social experience, rehearsal of the role anticipated, the recentness of those experiences, attentiveness to role behaviors, and good memory skills. ftese skills can be developed and honed during the edu- cational experience (Terry et al., 2020).
As challenging as internalizing role behaviors is mov-
ing from one role or subrole to another (see Box 3.2), not only must one learn new behaviors, but one must break from old ones. Inadequate socialization predicts marginalization or the inability to either remain in a previous role or move on to another. A case in point is the nurse who functions on the periphery of a system, never quite becoming part of it or bothering to know the personalities involved and refusing to assimilate nursing with the other aspects of life. ftis is particularly common in people who try to juggle multiple aspects of life, keeping each separate—obligations everywhere, multiple lists of things to do, each with a first-place pri- ority, a comprehensive plan nowhere. fte wiser strategy is to integrate the dimensions of life with professional colleagues becoming personal friends, family participat- ing in workplace and professional events, and multiple to-do lists becoming one list with one rank ordering of priorities.





     Socialization as a Continuous Process
Break From Previous Roles
Minimize previous advantage. Break previous peer relationships.
Convert previous peer relationships into friend- ship relationships.
Maintain a portfolio or clinical log reflecting on your evolving practice, values, and attitudes.

Establish a New Peer Group
Clarify new responsibilities that accompany changed status.
Considerthevalues, attitudes, knowledge, andskills that will contribute to success.
Develop new peer group associations.

Move to the New Role Prescription (Accommodation)
Provide role rehearsal opportunities. Review benefits of mastery.
Consider a mentor.
Identify support systems among role partners.*

Assimilate Role Behaviors
Be aware of change of self-concept.
Recognize the rites of passage as more than symbolic. Create opportunities for success.
Treat failure as a learning experience.
Move on to process and outcome evaluation once the role is established although not matured.*A role partner may hold the same role or a role that is reciprocal but definitely has role expectations of the primary role occupant.



Role Acquisition
Knowledge and skill acquisition are important as- pects of role implementation in nursing, both for the entry-level registered nurse and for the APN. ftis is not to ignore the essential part played by attitudes and values (the belief system), but to acknowledge that

knowledge and skill are expected of professionals by the public (audience group), leadership in the field (com- parative group), and peers (normative group). fte skill acquisition model, developed by Dreyfus and Dreyfus (1977) and later applied to nursing by Benner (2001), tells us that even experts perform as novices when they enter new roles or subroles, although they proceed to acquisition at a quicker pace. ftis pattern is verified by several authorities, including Brykczynski (2000) and Roberts et al. (1997). In observing APN students, they report periods of regression, anxiety, and conflict be- fore the incorporation of new role behaviors. ftis is not unexpected, and an analogy can be drawn from work with groups. It is common that in the beginning of a group or when a new member is introduced into an established group, there is a loss of confidence among individual members. fte introduction of a person into a milieu with new role expectations is a temporary set- back, even when some of the behaviors have been well established in a previous role. fte regression and loss of confidence are often followed by anger directed to- ward faculty and preceptors whom they see as guilty of not giving them enough knowledge or skill. In many ways, they are grieving the role they had previously mastered and responding to the anxiety over moving on (Pleshkan & Hussey, 2020).
Anticipatory socialization should be a planned goal
during the student period and not left to chance. Am- ple opportunity should be provided for students to get to know APNs who may just be beginning their careers (peer group) and to participate in discussions with sea- soned APNs regarding practice issues (accommodation). Both of these goals may be accomplished through the state nurses association, especially if there is a forum or division on advanced practice. Other experiences should be incorporated in the educational program, such as the opportunity to dialogue with employers and practicing APNs about their expectations of the role (Terry et al., 2020). Box 3.3 contains a format for the participation of APNs on a panel describing their practice and role development for students. ftese anticipatory experi- ences should facilitate the period of resocialization as a graduate.
It would be remiss not to mention the clinical
competency of faculty. Clinically competent faculty are necessary to give credibility to the program and





Questions to Guide Advanced Practice Nurse
     Participation in a Panel on Advanced Practice
How did you find your first position after graduation?
What job-seeking strategies would you advise new graduates to use in today’s market?
How do any or all of the following fit into your specific position?
What is your prescriptive authority?
What kind of practice privileges (i.e., admitting, treating, consulting, and discharging) do you have?
What system do you have for reimbursement? Do you participate in a managed-care panel?
How have your functions or role changed over the years, and were those changes the result of the evolution of the profession, your choices, your advocacy, or the expectations of an employer?
Have you been an active participant in developing your role? How so?
What are the major stresses and strains in your practice? How do you handle them?
Describe your collaborative arrangement with a physician.
How do you show outcomes or document the value of your contribution to the practice (or to your employer)?
How do you maintain your practice credibility?
Do you plan to further develop your own role or skill set? If so, how?
What were the most valuable aspects of your graduate educational preparation for advanced practice? fte least valuable?
What do you know now that you wish you had known earlier in your career?
What is your experience with mentoring, either as mentor or protégé?
How important to your professional development was this mentor(ed) experience?
to narrow the gap between education and practice. fte best of all worlds would be for faculty to teach

using their own panel of patients. Although this is often impossible, it is still necessary for faculty to maintain their clinical skills to be able to critique prac- tice and provide the proper oversight for preceptors (Pleshkan & Hussey, 2020).
  Benner (2001) describes five levels of skill acquisi- tion: novice, advanced beginner, competent, proficient, and expert. As one proceeds along this continuum, one becomes more involved in the process of caring until at the expert stage situations are recognized in terms of their holistic patterns rather than a cluster of component parts and the context becomes somewhat irrelevant. In the early stages, new behaviors are accommodated and they later become assimilated in the practice repertoire until at the highest level they appear intuitive. Movement from accommodation to assimilation or from novice to expert with its intermediate steps is best accomplished through accruing experience with the opportunity to apply both practical and theoretical knowledge and pro- viding situations in which failure is allowed and treated as a learning experience. It should be noted that Benner’s model is experiential and does not consider education as a variable in distinguishing these skill levels. However, you cannot apply what you do not know. It would be interesting to use Benner’s model to compare an APN and a non-master’s-prepared registered nurse, both with similar experience.
It is helpful for APN students to consciously ap-
proach the socialization process knowing their norma- tive, comparative, and audience groups and being aware of the changes that are expected to take place in their own behaviors, values, and attitudes. Socializing expe- riences, provided during the course of studies, are pre- sented in Box 3.4.

Socialization Deficits
One of the most compelling challenges in professional education is to provide adequate socialization. Socializa- tion deficits are guaranteed to inhibit role performance, introducing additional stress into roles that are already by nature stressful.
   APNs are increasingly prepared in programs of part- time study. In addition, the movement into the com- munity college and university settings for entry-level education has, to some degree, diluted the intensity of





Role-Enhancing Experiences Planned During Your Education (Applicable to Either
     Pre-Licensure or Graduate Education)
A synthesis semester at the end of the educa- tional program that incorporates, as far as le- gally possible, all the ingredients of full-time employment
Work-study programs that alternate semesters with work placements in your anticipated field
A curriculum that progresses toward more indepen- dence and personal accountability with students and faculty moving to a collegial relationship as opposed to superiors and subordinates
Service-education partnerships with faculty teach- ing students as they practice with their own patients
Opportunity for students to work with faculty on their personal research or in their practice
Summer externships and new graduate internships or residencies
Patient clinical areas with a primary commitment to the clinical learning needs of students (the designated teaching unit)
Participation in activities suited to APNs (e.g., conferences, meetings, and peer review sessions)
Preceptor or “buddy” system involving agency staff
An experience with interdisciplinary (or at the least multidisciplinary) education (Joel, 2011)

the socialization experience for nursing. Off-campus living arrangements, a cohort of students who depend on full-time or part-time employment or who have fam- ily obligations, courses of study that may be protracted over many years, and so on, all reduce the strength of the primary socialization into the profession. What is the result of an incomplete or weak primary socialization into nursing when moving on to the next role transition to advanced practice (Chen et al., 2007)? ftis remains a serious question yet to be answered. Further, even if the primary socialization is solid, what does incomplete

anticipatory socialization as an APN mean for role acqui- sition? ftis could create a situation of “marginal man,” in which a person is a member of one or more cultures but belongs to none. It also presents a strong case for ex- ternships and residency programs through which a con- centrated exposure to the role is guaranteed (Santucci, 2004; Starr, 2006). Certification also promises to help role acquisition and role progression with its expectation of additional education and investment in practice.

STRESS AND STRAIN
 	
Stress and strain are natural companions of advanced practice, given the chaotic health-care environment and the fact that these roles are evolving and growing in prominence. Hardy and Hardy (1988b) tell us that role stress is primarily located in the social structure, external to the individual, and owing to incompatible normative expectations. It may or may not generate role strain, the feeling of frustration and anxiety internal to the individual.

Antecedents of Stress and Strain
Many situations can create stress and strain for the APN. ftese include the educational preparation in which we may overlook opportunities for anticipatory social- ization and a rapidly restructuring health-care deliv- ery system that demands continuous minor or major modification in roles. Specialization and advances in technology make roles that have become well established over time obsolete and require the role occupants to face a new cycle of ambiguity and transition (Creakbaum, 2011). Beyond this, there is also the growing emphasis on cost efficiency, consumerism, and the demedicaliza- tion of health care. None of these trends are surprising to the reader, but the effect they have on roles is often unexpected and unintended. fte traditional hierarchy of the system is radically changed, and the primary care provider is as likely to be an APN or a physician assistant as a physician. Consumer is “king,” and health-care or- ganizations are competing to corner their market share of clients. Consumer satisfaction is a major outcome measure against which everyone is measured. Given the availability of information, consumers often enter the



system with as much information about their condition as the professional who attends them. At the same time, we see the slow but decisive movement toward comple- mentary therapies that have not been part of our nurs- ing repertoire in the past but that are demanded by the public.
   To further complicate the situation, reality finds most nurses as employees in health-care systems. One should never lose sight of the fact that systems (whether large or small, simple or complex) exist to secure their goals and preserve their values. ftey accomplish this by respond- ing to changing conditions, achieving solidarity among their parts, using a division of labor to accomplish work, controlling the environment, maintaining order, and us- ing resources efficiently. Efficiency has caused a move to accomplish many things through “adhocracy”—systems established for a limited goal and then disbanded. Sub- contracting in addition to internal departments allow greater flexibility to adjust to change. In a similar man- ner, the nursing role has been forced to readjust or jeop- ardize organizational stability, so resocialization becomes a continuing process and stress and strain a constant by-product of this process.

Classifying Role Stress
After an exhaustive analysis of research on role stress as it existed in 1988, Hardy and Hardy (1988b) developed the classification system of the origins of role stress pre- sented in Box 3.5. ftis classification remains relevant today.
   Stress and strain are predictable in situations that in- clude ambiguity, ambivalence, incongruity, conflict, and underload and overload and in situations in which the role occupants see themselves as underqualified or over- qualified or are moving into a new role or are engaged in anticipatory socialization. An example of ambiguity is the new APN who accepts a position without an ad- equate job description in a setting where there has been little experience with advanced practice, and so there are no seasoned peers to provide direction or support. An ex- ample of incongruity is the nurse who has been prepared exclusively for primary care practice and who accepts a position that requires extensive coaching and teaching of nursing staff in a specialty area. Role conflict may re- sult when the staff nurse feels an obligation to provide



     Classification of the Origins of Role Stress
Role ambiguity—ftere is vagueness and lack of clarity of the role expectations.
Roleconflict—Roleexpectationsareincompatible. Role incongruity—ftere is a poor fit between the person’s abilities and their expectations or the expectations of the systems with which they
interface.
Role overload—ftere is too much expected in the time available.
Role underload—Role expectations are minimal and underuse the abilities of the role occupant. Role overqualification—Role occupant’s moti- vation, skills, and knowledge far exceed those
required.
Role underqualification (role incompetence)— Role occupant lacks the necessary cognitive, affective, or psychomotor resources to accom- plish the work.
Role transition—Person moves to a new role.
quality care but then finds it impossible to achieve sat- isfactory outcomes within the limits of a predetermined length of stay or in a situation in which the nurse be- lieves that his or her clinical judgment is superior to the client’s own choices but the client refuses to comply. Overload and underload often require a more objective opinion as well as the self-assurance to revisit goals and objectives to make them more realistic. Being overqua- lified or underqualified moves into areas of competence. Some individuals may consider themselves overqualified because they never strain to see or are untrained to see the complexities of a situation. fte same circumstances may give rise to feelings of underload. Peer discussion of such clinical situations is helpful to verify your opin- ion of yourself. Feelings of being underqualified must be talked through and validated, or they result in living the life of an “impostor.”
fte stress and strain that come with most of the ser-
vice occupations are labeled codependency or burnout in the literature. ftese two terms are related but dif- ferent. In codependency, a person controls a  situation



through the assurance that they are needed and works to keep things that way, whereas in burnout there is difficulty determining who owns a problem. fte result is anger stemming from the moral imperative to make a difference yet the inability to succeed. fte natural im- pulse of nurses to feel for their patients and occasionally bring home their frustrations is played out with exag- geration and eventually rejected. With time, where once they felt too much, they now feel too little in defense of their ego. fte result is poor judgment, insensitivity, and intolerance (Joel, 1994). ftis is the end result of burn- out. fte codependent personality is at particularly high risk for burnout, which eventually results in negativism and the severe loss of self-esteem as one’s clinical compe- tence is questioned.

Responding to Role Strain
Kramer (1974), in an extensive longitudinal study that is still relevant after almost 50 years, identified the prob- lems of new graduates in establishing their roles in the midst of bureaucratic-professional conflict and termed it reality shock. Kramer speaks of “the specific shock-like reactions of new workers when they find themselves in a work situation for which they have spent several years preparing and for which they thought they were going to be prepared, and then suddenly find that they are not” (p. vi). When the new nurse, who has been in the work setting but not of it, embarks on a first professional work experience, there is not an easy adaptation of previously learned values, attitudes, and behaviors but the necessity of an entirely new socialization to practice and simulta- neous resolution of conflict with the bureaucracy. ftis process of resocialization from student to graduate can be easily applied to the APN. Kramer (1974) describes the steps as follows:
1. Skills and routine mastery: fte expectations are those of the employment setting. A major value is competent, efficient delivery of procedures and techniques to clients. New graduates immediately concentrate on skill and routine mastery.
2. Social integration: [Social integration is] getting along with the group; being taught by them how to work and behave; the “backstage” reality behav- iors. If individuals stay at stage one, they may not be

perceived as competent peers; if they try to incorpo- rate some of the professional concepts brought over from the educational setting and adhere to those values, the group may be alienated.
3. Moral outrage: With the incongruence identified and labeled, new graduates feel angry and betrayed by both their teachers and employers. ftey weren’t told how it would be, and they aren’t allowed to practice as they were taught.
4. Conflict resolution: fte graduates may and do change their behavior, but maintain their values, or change both values and behaviors to match the work setting; or change neither values nor behavior; or work out a relationship that allows them to keep their values, but begin to integrate them into the new setting.
fte individuals who make the first choice have selected what is called behavioral capitulation. ftey may be the group with potential for making change, but they simply slide into the bureaucratic mold, or more likely, they withdraw from nursing practice altogether. ftose who choose bureaucracy (value capitulation) may ei- ther become “rutters” (staying in a rut), with an “it’s a job” attitude, or they may eventually reject the values of both themselves and the system. Others become or- ganization men and women, who move rapidly into the administrative ranks and totally absorb the bureaucratic values. ftose who will change neither values nor behav- ior, what might be called “going it alone,” either seek to practice where professional values are accepted or try the “academic lateral arabesque” (also used by the first group), going on to advanced education with the hope of new horizons or escape. fte most desirable choice, says Kramer (1974, p. 162), is biculturalism:
In this approach the nurse has learned that she possesses a value orientation that is perhaps different from the dom- inant one in the work organization, but that she has the responsibility to listen to and seek out the ideas of others as resource material in affecting a viable integration of both value systems. She has learned that she is not just a target of influence and pressure from others, but that she is in a reciprocal relationship with others and has the right and responsibility to attempt to influence them and to direct their influence attempts . . . she has learned a basic posture of interdependence with respect of the conflicting value systems.



Even though complicated by the bureaucratic-professional conflict, our original paradigm for socialization is visible in biculturalism.
   New graduates do indeed go through variations of this experience, including role-taking, role-making, and bargaining. ftat there was little change in the ad- justment process for decades can be seen by reviewing journals in the interim and by the nomadic workplace patterns of nurses, which must reflect deep-seated job dissatisfaction. Turnover may be a response to bore- dom, lack of involvement, and apathy and may trace its origin to incomplete or ineffective socialization, or more correctly, ignorance of the socialization pro- cess. Strain may be handled by redefining the role or its expectations, by bargaining among role partners to reestablish priorities, or by decreasing or increasing the degree of interaction.

Managing Role Strain
ftere is no one prescription for coming to terms with an unmanageable personal or professional life. fte prob- lems are relative to the personality of the afflicted, and solutions must be individualized. fte ultimate goal is to establish control and identity that is driven by internal strength, rather than being captive to the volatility of the environment. Given that your best investment is in self-care, consider the following:
• Learn to use distance therapeutically. Allow people to fail and learn from their own mistakes.
• Find a comfortable and private place to which you can
retreat when you are stressed. If you cannot physically distance yourself, try meditation techniques.
• Decide who owns a problem. If you don’t own it, you
have no obligation to fix it, especially if it requires self-sacrifice.
• Examine the quality of the peer support you give and
get, and correct the situation if needed. Sometimes support systems become habits as opposed to helps.
• Invest in upgrading yourself. Expose yourself to new
experiences; learn new skills. Plan your self-care as se- riously as you plan your patient care.
• Consciously schedule routine tasks and those requir-
ing physical exertion as a break from complex and stressful activities.
• 
Learn to trust your instincts. Every problem does not have a rational and logical solution.
• Sometimes think in terms of what could be the worst
consequence, then anything short of that is a bonus.
• Identify one person willing to serve as your objective sounding board. ftis may be one way to find out how you come across to people.
• Make contact with your feelings about situations.
Feelings are neither good nor bad; they just are.
• Create options for yourself. Identify those circum- stances that you need to personally control, those that are just as well controlled for you, and those that you choose to wait out.

SUMMARY


Socialization into role is a major responsibility of the nursing profession, whether at the point of immersion into the student role and anticipatory socialization to the profession or later with transition to registered nurse and for some on to advanced practice. Socialization requires personalizing a role to your preferences while complying with norms established by the government, the profes- sion, the public, and the employing institution. ftese are your normative, comparative, and audience groups, your major referents; there may be others. fte norms held by these groups may be broadly or narrowly interpreted and are revealed through the process of role-taking or empathic communication. ftere is an opportunity to modify these expectations once you are sensitive to the degree of flexibility allowed by each referent system. ftis process involves skill in reading our role partners and the environment and reciprocally working to make the role to our liking. ftis skill can be learned.
Stress and strain are natural companions to nurses,
given the environment in which we work and the work we do. Role stress is located in the social structure and role strain in the person. Not all stressful circumstances produce strain; this depends on the individual and their ability to cope, problem solve, and search for meaning in difficult situations. Success in dealing with stress and strain may be related to complete and effective socializa- tion. ftis observation reinforces the obligation to both provide socialization experiences and to equip nurses with the resources for self-care.















  Educational  Preparation of Advanced Practice Nurses
Looking to the Future
Phyllis Shanley Hansell




Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected after review of this chapter:
• Understand the historical background of education for advanced practice.
• Describe external factors that drive demand and influence education for advanced practice.
• Distinguish the advanced practice nurse (APN) role and educational requirements
for the nurse practitioner (NP), nurse anesthetist (NA), clinical nurse-midwife (CNM), and clinical nurse specialist.
• Describe the factors that propelled the Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP).
• Identify distinctions in scholarship between the DNP and the PhD.
• Explain the process of transition from MSN to DNP for the APN.
• Explain the pros and cons of postgraduate residencies and fellowships for the APN.
• Propose potential synergy between the DNP and PhD.
• Explain how the DNP graduate is best prepared to advance practice.
• Propose the future of the DNP and PhD graduates working in tandem to advance the profession.



44



BACKGROUND

fte education of advanced practice nurses (APNs) has in- creased in complexity as curricula have evolved in response to societal needs. ftese curricular changes are in response to health-care reform in tandem with the transformation of health-care delivery brought about by the Patient Pro- tection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) (Public Law 111-148). Since Henry Silver and Loretta Ford created the first nurse practitioner (NP) certificate programs in 1965 at the University of Colorado, the NP role and educational preparation for the role have been met with some degree of controversy from both inside and outside the nursing profession. ftis dissonance has extended beyond NP edu- cation and now includes the practices of nurse-midwives, nurse anesthetists, and clinical nurse specialists.
fte PPACA (2010) improved access to health care,
particularly for underserved populations who reside in rural and inner-city areas, which subsequently increased demand for primary health care. Many of the provisions included in the PPACA acknowledge the important contributions of nurses, especially APNs. fte PPACA includes the following support:
• fte establishment of nurse-managed health centers
• Funding for school-based health centers
• Funding to support collaboration between nursing schools and health-care facilities
• Loan forgiveness for individuals willing to practice in
a pediatric subspecialty (including mental health) in an underserved area
• Funding to support Independence at Home Demon-
stration for chronically ill Medicare beneficiaries that uses both NPs and physicians and is aimed at reduc- ing expenditures and improving health outcomes
• An increase in the reimbursement rate for certified
nurse-midwives (CNMs) for covered services from 65% to 100%
   ftese PPACA-funded initiatives support and fur- ther deploy the professional expertise of APNs, enabling them to make a difference in the delivery and quality of health care, especially to those who are underserved. A study sponsored by the Rand Corporation (Auerbach et al., 2015) and commissioned by the American Associa- tion of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) Board of Directors found that there is now universal agreement within the

nursing community on the value of doctor of nursing practice (DNP) education that is preparing nurses to meet future health-care needs (Auerbach etal., 2015). Because of this study, the AACN Board of Directors con- vened a task force to review the state of DNP programs to better clarify both curricular and practice expecta- tions as outlined in the Essentials of Doctoral Education for Advanced Nursing Practice (AACN, 2006) and to highlight practice scholarship and academic partnership opportunities.
  fte 21st century has been a significant time for nurs- ing’s coming of age, first with recognition by the Carne- gie Foundation that nursing is now considered a mature, science-driven profession, and second, with recognition that APNs are key contributors to health care. ftis new- found recognition has much to do with the exponential growth of nursing science and translational nursing re- search that has enlarged the foundation of scientific evi- dence supporting nursing practice (AACN, 2010).
  fte lingering controversies over the preferred aca- demic credential for entry into advanced practice contin- ues to some extent. At the AACN semiannual meeting in 2004, the member deans present voted to endorse and support the DNP degree as the entry-level educational credential for APNs, which was to be effective as of 2015. fte discussion that ensued was quite impassioned. A se- cret ballot was held and when the votes were tallied, the results were 162 in affirmative, 101 in opposition, and 13 in abstention. Voices in opposition came from two divergent factions of the assembly: deans who viewed the DNP as beyond the resources of their institutions and deans of schools with well-established highly resourced Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) programs. fte prevailing view was that the MSN-APN curriculum fell short in both depth and breadth, had become increasingly nar- row in focus, and needed to be wider in scope to better meet the increasingly complex needs of the population. In addition, for APNs to achieve parity with other major health professionals, a terminal clinical practice degree was needed to both reinforce the status of nurses as a major autonomous health-care provider while simulta- neously enabling the achievement of better patient care outcomes. Other major considerations were the pro- posed requirement of 1,000 supervised clinical practice hours along with the focus on clinical scholarship and analytical methods to support evidence-based practice.



  Before the 2004 presentation of the proposal for the DNP degree, the AACN had sponsored speakers from the American Association of Colleges of Phar- macy at an earlier semiannual meeting. ftese speakers presented their 10-year transition from the Bachelor of Pharmacy to Doctor of Pharmacy degree, the first professional degree that is a terminal practice degree. As a result, the AACN constituted a task force to ex- plore the DNP. fte report of this task force provided the impetus for the 2004 vote by the AACN mem- bership, which then was followed by the development and approval of The Essentials of Doctoral Education for Advanced Nursing Practice in 2006. Other degrees considered analogous to the DNP by the AACN in- clude doctorates in medicine (MD), dentistry (DDS and DMD), pharmacy (PharmD), psychology (PsyD), physical therapy (DPT), and audiology (AudD) (AACN, 2011).
fte movement to advance doctoral education for
nurses in the United States is strong and has gained sig- nificant momentum. According to AACN (2019b) data, there are currently 515 doctoral-level nursing programs in the United States, which include 140 PhD, Doctor of Nursing Science (DNS), or Doctor of Education in nursing (EdD) research programs and 375 DNP pro- grams with 90 more programs in the planning stages. Most schools that offer the PhD nursing degree also offer the DNP.
   According to the AACN’s 2019 Annual Report: Cele- brating 50 Years as the Voice of Academic Nursing (AACN, 2019a), 142,551 students are currently enrolled in master’s programs (including master’s entry students); 4,568 students are enrolled in research-focused doctoral programs; and 36,069 students are currently enrolled in DNP programs, which is up significantly from the 18,352 students who were enrolled in 2015. Although the master of science in nursing (MSN) continues to be the predominant route to certification for APNs, the trend is moving in the direction of the Bachelor of Science of nursing (BSN) to DNP with MSN advanced practice programs coexisting in most schools that offer the DNP and BSN-to-DNP programs. Although the postbaccalaureate DNP is taking hold, most nurses often seek the more expeditious option, which is the MSN. Currently, the MSN still meets the requirement for APN certification.
  
When one takes a retrospective look at the credential- ing of NPs, it is noteworthy that in 1965 the certificate became the first advanced educational postbaccalaureate credential for the first generation of pediatric NPs (the first NP role). Two years later in 1967, Boston College introduced the first MSN with an NP track. Like the cer- tificate program at the University of Colorado, the pro- gram at Boston College (Historical Timeline, AANP.org, 2020) included efforts that were collaboratively led by nursing and medicine. As the educational requirements for NPs uniformly advanced to the master’s level, many concerns arose over grandfathering NPs with certificates when MSN degree preparation became the standard re- quirement for certification (Ford, 1975). Although there once was a defined period of grandfathering for certifi- cate NP graduates, there is currently no grandfathering clause remaining in any state that would allow any APN (nurse-midwife, nurse anesthetist, clinical nurse special- ist [CNS], or NP) to enter practice without an advanced degree. It is important to note that because advanced practice nursing is regulated by state statute, older nurses with an advanced practice certificate have been able to continue to practice so long as the state and their spe- cialty-certifying bodies recognize their status. In the United States, there are 50 different state nurse practice acts (NPAs) under which the advanced practice roles are regulated. For this reason, in 2008 the National Coun- cil of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) introduced the Consensus Model for APRN Regulation: Licensure, Accred- itation, Certification and Education, designed to provide some common structural guidance for the preparation and practice of APNs.
APNs are prepared through a variety of educational
programs with oversight carried out by specialty certi- fication boards; hence, there are different requirements for different advanced practice roles. fte American Mid- wifery Certification Board (AMCB) and the American College of Nurse-Midwives (ACNM) have eliminated recognition of all postbaccalaureate certificate programs and in July 2009 required a graduate degree for entry into practice, which went into effect in 2010 (ACNM, 2012). Moreover, in 2009 the ACNM also moved to re- quire recertification for CNMs who were certified before 1996 to ensure the highest quality of nurse-midwifery care. At this time, the ACNM has taken the position to not require the DNP for entry into practice.



   In 2015, the American Association of Nurse Anes- thetists (AANA) determined that all certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA) programs should begin re- vising their curricula from the Master of Science to the Doctor of Nurse Anesthesia Practice (DNAP) with the stipulation that by 2025 all CRNA programs will be re- quired to transition to the DNAP credential. According to the AANA (2019), beginning in 2022 all students matriculating into an accredited nurse anesthesia pro- gram must be enrolled in a DNAP program. Graduates prior to 2025 will be grandfathered in and will not be required to complete the DNAP program.
In June 2015, the National Association of Clinical
Nurse Specialists (NACNS) endorsed the DNP as the entry into practice for clinical nurse specialists (CNSs) by 2030 (NACNS, 2015). Although the NACNS previ- ously supported both the MSN and the DNP as the cre- dential for CNS entry into practice, its position now is that the DNP provides the CNS with the knowledge and skills that will support the complexity of care to achieve the best patient care outcomes.
   fte American Association of Nurse Practitioners (AANP) has been a leader in the DNP movement since 2001; and although a master’s degree is still accepted for NP certification, the board of directors of the National Organization of Nurse Practitioner Faculties (NONPF) reaffirmed its allegiance (NONPF, September 2018) to advancing the DNP degree as the entry-level academic preparation for NPs. Subsequently on April 20, 2018, the NONPF made a commitment to move all entry-level NP education to the DNP degree by 2025. fte sooner the educational standards for NPs advance to the DNP, the better it will be for both APNs and their patients. It is paramount that the transition to the practice doctorate preparation continue so that NPs advance together.
fte typical MSN curriculum for APNs is highly
focused on the specialty area of practice, leaving mini- mal opportunity for students to opt for elective areas of study. When one examines the eight Essentials of Doctoral Education for Advanced Practice Nursing (AACN, 2006), the DNP offers much to round out the knowledge, skills, and expertise of the graduate with the inclusion of (a) interprofessional collaboration, (b) health policy advocacy, (c) clinical scholarship and analytical methods for evidence-based practice, and (d) organizational and systems leadership and the scientific underpinnings of

practice. fte AACN Essentials (2006) clearly augment the MSN curriculum in needed ways by equipping the APN of the future to create and advance patient care at the highest level possible.

THE DOCTOR OF NURSING PRACTICE


According to the AANP’s NP Fact Sheet, there are 290,000 NPs licensed in the United States (AANP, 2020). fte other APN roles comprise a relatively small proportion of APNs as follows: 72,000 CNSs, 54,000 nurse anesthetists, and 11,194 CNMs.
  fte goal to migrate all APNs to the doctorate (ex- cluding those who already have the degree) is a highly ambitious undertaking. Some question whether this is a realistic goal when the movement to require the entry-level doctorate for advanced nursing practice will be a complex process. Although the AACN contributes to the development of standards, it lacks the legal author- ity to enforce these standards on the various state nurs- ing regulatory bodies and with the respective advanced practice specialty organizations. Furthermore, the two chief accrediting bodies in nursing, the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (CCNE) and the Accred- itation Commission for Education in Nursing (ACEN, formerly fte National League for Nursing Accredita- tion Commission [NLNAC]), have elected to accredit DNP programs. fte CCNE has elected to accredit only practice doctorate programs with the initials “DNP”; whereas the ACEN believes that as advanced practice doctorates move in this new direction, they will accredit whatever title suits the program, believing that nursing is best served by focusing on competencies, learning out- comes, and curriculum (NLN CNEA, 2020).
In the past, APNs who pursued doctoral education
sought research-focused doctorates such as the PhD, DNSc, DNS, DSN, and EdD as well as doctorates in other disciplines. By 2008, most of the various nurs- ing doctoral degrees had converted to the PhD (Dreher et al., 2008) with strong consensus supporting the PhD in Nursing as the professional standard for research doctoral degrees in the field. APNs faced a new choice with the emergence of the practice doctorate, which is best suited to those who are dedicated practitioners. ftose who instead opt for the PhD degree have the



advancement of nursing science as their goal. In the fu- ture, when the DNP becomes the standard for entry into advanced practice, the PhD will continue as the research degree in nursing. Like medicine, where the practitioner may seek a combined MD/PhD, the option for the nurse to seek both the DNP and the PhD exists. Currently, the universities that offer combined DNP/PhD pro- grams include the University of Arizona, Johns Hopkins University, the University of Michigan, Case Western Reserve University, the University of Tennessee Health Science Center, and Barnes Jewish College of Nursing in Saint Louis.

Transition From the MSN to the DNP
When experienced APNs continue their education at the DNP level, what is the gain? I asked five recent DNP students/graduates what they had gained from the DNP program and how it changed them. Here are their responses:
1. “fte Doctor of Nursing Practice offers the highest level of quality and safety to the patients in their care, the nurses on their team and the system within which they practice. Let us welcome this new rec- ognition of Nursing Practice excellence! Changed attitudes = changed outcomes!”
2. “fte DNP has provided the essential knowledge necessary to translate evidence into practice in order to improve health quality, cost efficiency and sus- tainability of effective processes.”
3. “Coming from such a strong clinical background, the DNP program has helped me integrate my col- laborative clinical practice and research with current trends in the evolution of health care issues.”
4. “fte DNP enabled me to recognize health delivery system problems and conduct evidence-based schol- arly projects toward rectifying those issues.”
5. “fte DNP has better prepared me to provide holis- tic and comprehensive health care within the con- text of a rapidly transforming health care delivery system.”
   Clearly, for even the most experienced APN, there is much to be gained from the DNP curriculum to shape the APN’s practice and ultimately to benefit the patient and society.

The Tipping Point for the DNP
fte DNP has been an option in nursing education since 2001, beginning at the College of Nursing at the Uni- versity of Kentucky. From that institution, nine students graduated with the degree in 2005. In contrast, the first doctoral program in nursing was the EdD in Nursing Ed- ucation offered in 1932 at Teachers College, Columbia University. In 1934, the first PhD in nursing was es- tablished at New York University. fte genesis of today’s DNP practitioner-focused model is credited to Dr. Mary Mundinger, former dean of Columbia University’s School of Nursing. In 2000, Mundinger and her colleagues pub- lished a clinical trial in the Journal of the American Medi- cal Association titled “Primary Care Outcomes in Patients Treated by Nurse Practitioners or Physicians: A Random- ized Trial.” ftis groundbreaking project on the NP model ultimately led to development of the clinical doctorate or DrNP degree, which was approved in 2005. fte Columbia University DrNP model went through an evolution during which the faculty first described the degree as a “DrNP in Primary Care” and later simply as the “first clinical doctor- ate.” In 2008, Columbia University changed the letters of the degree to the DNP to comply with CCNE standards.

Rationale for the DNP Degree
Despite the plethora of DNP programs, MSN students continue to outnumber those enrolled in BSN/DNP programs. Yet there are convincing reasons to support an entry-level doctorate for nursing. ftese include re- form in health profession education mainly because of rising health-care errors, patient safety issues, and the changing roles of providers; failure of the health disci- plines to work collaboratively and deliver optimal health outcomes; and the rising cost of health-care services. fte AACN’s central arguments for why entry into advanced practice nursing should require the doctorate instead of the master’s degree are as follows:
• MSN degrees, especially those preparing the NP, CNS, CRNA, or CNM, often required as many credit hours as some clinical doctorate programs in other disciplines.
• Other disciplines such as physical therapy (DPT) and
pharmacy (PharmD) had begun offering a clinical doctorate.



• Contemporary knowledge is growing exponentially and the master’s degree can no longer fully encompass the breadth of coursework necessary for professional advanced practice (Apold, 2008).

   As compelling as these arguments are, they are not all data based. Although the argument about the total num- ber of credits could be considered a salient one, credits alone do not merit a doctoral degree. Health-care reform, the growing aging population, and the implementation of the PPACA challenge the status quo. In our changing, complex world of health care, ANPs must be prepared to address patients’ changing, complex needs. More edu- cation about health systems and evidence-based practice are needed.
  fte DNP degree has gained wide acceptance by the academic nursing community, and it is highly probable that candidates with a practice doctorate will have an advantage in the competitive and changing job market. fte nursing community is challenged to substantiate that the added cost, time, and resources needed to edu- cate the DNP graduate will improve health care as well as the status and expertise of the APN.
  
With 354 DNP programs in the United States cur- rently enrolling 32,678 students (AACN, 2019), the “tipping point” has been reached, and the DNP is well along on its way to acceptance, especially within the clinical practice arena. Within academia, the DNP cre- dential is accepted and well suited for clinical track ap- pointments. However, most major universities do not accept the DNP for tenure-track positions and continue to require a research doctorate for those appointments. See Figure 4.1 for degrees conferred in nursing.
  fte DNP has existed for slightly more than a decade with some of the early programs developed prior to the standards set forth in the AACN’s Essentials of Doctoral Education for Advanced Nursing Practice (2006). fte result has been some degree of unevenness in program requirements, particularly concerning the final capstone project. Fink (2006) indicates that the professional (or practice) doctorate “should not be a watered-down ver- sion of the PhD but offer a valid alternative in doctoral education” (p. 38). fte AACN Essentials (2006) state that scholarship and research represent the hallmark of doctoral-level education. Although original research is paramount in the advancement of science, a much



400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0
Number of PhD Programs	Number of DNP Programs
2007	2008	2009	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016	2017	2018	2019
Figure 4.1 The Number of DNP and PhD Programs in the United States 2007–2019



broader view has emerged that enlarges that perspective through alternative paradigms (Boyer, 1990). ftis per- spective acknowledges the following: (a) the scholarship of integration and discovery more specifically “reflects the investigative and synthesizing traditions of academic life” (Boyer, p. 21); (b) scholars give meaning to isolated facts and make connections across disciplines through the scholarship of integration; and (c) the scholar applies knowledge to solve problems via the scholarship of ap- plication (in nursing, this is practice).
   Essential III of the Essentials of Doctoral Education for Advanced Nursing Practice (AACN, 2006) specifies that Clinical Scholarship and Analytical Methods for Evidence-Based Practice is an important component of the DNP curriculum. fte DNP graduate engages as an APN, thus providing the leadership for evidence-based practice. In contrast, the PhD graduate acquires the re- search skills needed for discovering new knowledge in the discipline. fte DNP graduate requires competence in knowledge-application activities including translation of research into practice, practice evaluation of the im- provement of the reliability of health-care practices and outcomes, and participation in collaborative research (De Palma & McGuire, 2005). fte graduates of both research and practice doctoral programs are critical to the advance- ment of the profession and are optimally complementary to each other in the advancement of nursing science. fte DNP is not intended to be a watered-down version of the PhD or, as some may say, a “PhD lite”; rather, it is a rigorous professional practice terminal degree. If nursing science is to advance its practice, graduates of both the DNP and PhD programs are needed to achieve this im- portant goal.

FORK IN THE ROAD: THE DNP OR THE PhD

Nurses considering an advanced degree have much to ponder in terms of their long-term career goals. Because the clinically focused MSN will eventually phase out and be replaced by the DNP for all advanced practice roles except the CNM, the DNP will most likely be the degree that follows the BSN or MSN entry program. Although at present there are several BSN-to-PhD pro- grams, the student who chooses that pathway will not always have the depth of advanced clinical practice

that is foundational to doctoral study and that most MSN-prepared PhD students possess.

The Dissertation Versus the DNP Project
fte hallmark of doctoral education is scholarship, and the research doctorate in nursing is designed to prepare the graduate with the research skills needed to discover new knowledge to advance the discipline. In contrast, the DNP prepares graduates to be experts in the practice of nursing and to lead in the formulation and appropriate application of evidence-based practice. De Palma and McGuire (2005) state that to provide leadership in trans- lational research, the graduate needs to be competent in the translation of research in practice, the evaluation of practice, the improvement of the reliability of health-care practice and outcomes, and participation in collabora- tive research. Accordingly, the DNP curriculum needs to focus on the translation of new nursing science and its application and evaluation. One valuable contribution of the DNP graduate is the mobilization of an existing re- search finding that might previously have sat dormant on the shelf for perhaps decades. ftus, the DNP translates and applies research to advance the profession.
fte doctoral dissertation, which is typically the cul-
minating requirement for the PhD, is focused on new research, and the steps of the dissertation process in the United States are relatively standard across programs. ftese steps typically include proposal development and approval, data collection, data analysis, synthesis of find- ings, completion of a five- to six-chapter dissertation, and oral defense of the dissertation. In recent years, some major universities have given students the option of writing and submitting for peer review multiple ar- ticles on their research in place of the dissertation. fte dissertation is guided and supervised by a dissertation chairperson and committee.
fte proliferation of DNP programs has resulted in
significant variability in the final project requirement. Some DNP programs require students to complete a dissertation-type project that includes a committee and oral defense; others focus on the generation of original practice research; still others require a systematic review of the literature on a clinical topic with no actual in- volvement in the clinical practice setting. In contrast to the dissertation process, the final, or capstone, project is



typically guided by a mentor without a committee struc- ture and the project results are presented to faculty and students.
   For the DNP project to be consistent with the stan- dards articulated by the AACN (2006) and NONPF (2018), the project should address a complex practice, process, or systems problem in the setting. Evidence should then be used to improve practice, process, or out- comes; this makes it clear that the DNP graduate must have completed a project in the practice setting and must evaluate what was implemented to determine the out- comes. Based on the AACN and NONPF guidelines, Waldrop and colleagues (2014) defined five criteria for executing a successful DNP final project. ftey repre- sent these criteria with the acronym “EC as PIE” where E = Enhance, C = Culmination, P = Partnerships, I = Implements, and E = Evaluates.
In 2015, the AACN convened a task force on the cur-
rent state of implementation of the DNP to clarify cur- ricular and practice expectations as outlined in the DNP Essentials (AACN, 2006). An important outcome of the task force was the articulation of the distinction between research- and practice-focused doctorates. According to their statement, “Graduates of both research and prac- tice doctorates are prepared to generate new knowledge. However, research-focused graduates are prepared to generate knowledge through rigorous research and sta- tistical methodologies that may be broadly applicable or generalizable; whereas practice-focused graduates are prepared to generate new knowledge through innovation of practice change, the translation of evidence, and the implementation of quality improvement processes in specific practice settings, systems, or with specific pop- ulations to improve health or health outcomes” (AACN, 2015a).
fte AACN task force (2015a) clarified the scope of
the final scholarly project required for the DNP. fte project should be called the DNP project to avoid con- fusion with the dissertation. Because the DNP project is not a research dissertation, the term dissertation should not be used. fte scholarly DNP project may take on various forms as stipulated by an institution’s require- ment along with the students’ area of advanced practice but should remain standard for all students and include planning, implementation, and evaluation components. Contrary to the DNP Essentials (AACN, 2006), the task

force “believes that an integrative and systematic review alone is not considered a DNP project and does not pro- vide opportunities for students to develop and integrate scholarship into practice” (AACN, 2015b, p. 4). Addi- tional recommendations from the task force include the following: (a) there is no committee but rather a project team; (b) the dissemination of the project should de- scribe its purpose, planning, implementation, and evalu- ation components; and (c) evaluation of the final project is the responsibility of the faculty and should include ac- ademic, peer, and stakeholder review. As a programmatic outcome of the DNP curriculum, all students must have the opportunity to integrate all eight of the DNP Essen- tials (AACN, 2006, 2015a). All eight do not have to be demonstrated in the DNP project but rather completed throughout the curriculum. As DNP programs mature into a unique identity of their own and become more standardized and consistent with the DNP Essentials (AACN, 2006) and DNP task force recommendations (AACN, 2015a), standardization across programs will increase.

The Potential for Synergy Between the PhD and DNP
In the article “Strategic Innovation Between PhD and DNP Programs: Collaboration, Collegiality and Shared Resources” (2016), Edwards et al. share the results of a collaborative DNP and PhD project within the context of the East Tennessee State University’s Academic Health Science Center (p. 313). fteir project provides an ex- cellent example of the catalytic synergy that can take place when the strengths of DNP and PhD education are brought together. Table 4.1 contains examples of complementary residency experiences in the DNP and PhD programs (p. 317).
   As these common and complementary residency ac- tivities illustrate, there is much to be gained from the strategic collaboration between PhD and DNP students. Within the right context, this collaboration will con- tinue to develop beyond graduation to advance nursing science and evidence-based practice in innovative ways. Combining PhD and DNP resources may well trans- late and deliver best practices to patient care as never before envisioned. Partnerships between DNP and PhD students selected for the natural synergy of their


   Table 4.1	
Complementary Residency Experiences in the DNP and PhD Programs

PhD Research Residency ActivitiesDNP Practice Residency ActivitiesLiterature review in area of nursing scienceLiterature review of evidence in nursingPilot research projects for dissertationParticipation in quality improvementParticipation in full scope of researchDevelopment in capstone with mentorsPresentation at research conferencesPresentation at practice conferencesIPE (interprofessional education) collaborative experiencesIPE collaborative experiencesSubmission of research grant proposalsSubmission of practice or leadership grant proposalsParticipation to influence health policyParticipation to influence health policy


dissertations and DNP projects would likely speed the educational process, generate publications, and produce other outcomes that are both useful and fundable.
  As to whether the DNP or PhD degree is the best option or fit for an individual APN, the degree to choose depends more on an individual’s professional goals. fte APN who is focused on and immersed in clinical practice is probably best advised to seek the DNP degree; whereas the APN who is passionate about research and testing innovative interventions and models of care probably has goals that are more in alignment with the PhD. But the APN does not have to choose only one or the other. ftere is also the option of completing both the PhD and DNP, either as a dual degree or separately as one’s focus evolves, and different methodologies are needed. Each can be completed as a separate complementary degree that further builds on the practice or research founda- tion of the other. fte important conclusion is that APNs have choices in the selection of a terminal degree that best fits with their goals as they advance their careers. In the long view, there will probably come a time when all APNs complete the DNP, which then will form the foundation for most PhD students in nursing.
Moving into the future, there are important strate-
gic implications for the nursing profession with the rise of the DNP. PhD programs optimally will attract those with an interest in and a passion for research, which will ultimately lead to a more highly engaged scientific cadre

of nursing scholars. Clearly, complementary scholarship that includes both PhD and DNP graduates on the same team will serve to advance nursing science and practice to the next level.

The PhD in Nursing: The Future Is Bright
AACN data from 2009 to 2018 (AACN, 2019b, p. 5) reveal that there has been an increase in research doc- toral program enrollment from 4,177 in 2009 to 4,698 in 2018. More recently, there has been a slight decline in PhD enrollment of approximately 400 to 500 stu- dents. In contrast, DNP enrollment has increased from 269 students in 2005 to 32,678 in 2018. ftese strong numbers bode well for the nursing profession with a clear focus on the future of health care and how nurses can achieve the greatest difference. ftese numbers also clearly indicate that the DNP is minimally diverting ap- plicants from PhD programs, which continue relatively stable enrollment patterns.

The DNP and the Faculty Role
In 2006, the AACN stated that DNP graduates are not prepared for the full scope of the faculty role without additional education and supervision (McKenna, 2005; Wittmann-Price et al., 2011). Lack of preparation for the faculty role is a problem that is also evident for recent



PhD graduates, especially if they have had little or no previous teaching experience. fte exception involves re- cent graduates of PhD programs in nursing education, such as those at Villanova University and the EdD pro- gram at Teachers College, Columbia University. For new graduates of DNP and PhD programs alike, deans need to provide support systems that include senior faculty mentors with the understanding that the new DNP or PhD graduates are novices in need of support to succeed in all dimensions and demands of the faculty role.
   Although there has been an increase in the number of new PhD programs in nursing during the past de- cade, there has been limited support to properly social- ize and mentor doctoral students in the nurse scientist role, leaving many unprepared for the rigors of conduct- ing post dissertation research (Dreher & Smith Glasgow, 2011; Potempa et al., 2008). ftis is a criticism widely proffered by the University of Washington’s project on Re-envisioning the PhD Project (Nyquist & Wulff, 2000). Similar commentary about the PhD in business is found in “How Business Schools Lost fteir Way” from the Harvard Business Review (Bennis & O’Toole, 2005). fte parallels between business education and nursing educa- tion are striking. For almost a decade, professional busi- ness schools have come under intense criticism for failing to impart useful skills and instill norms for ethical busi- ness behavior. In academia, nursing finds itself trying to replicate the academic and scientific traditions of fields such as chemistry and history. ftis is especially common when PhD faculty have left clinical nursing practice years, perhaps even decades, earlier. fte mission to educate the doctoral-prepared practitioner or scholar seems to have been lost in the drive to create the proper nurse scientist. Nursing science that contributes critical, high-impact translational health research can distinguish the profes- sion of nursing, raise nursing’s credibility, better position the discipline within the community of science, and move the science from “bench to bedside.” At present, nurs- ing research lacks wide recognition and receives limited grant-funded support. For fiscal year 2019, the National Institute for Nursing Research received $162,992,000 in funding. At first glance, this number may appear to be a robust allocation; however, it represents one of the low- est levels of funding of any institute within the National Institutes of Health (NIH). In 2015, the total NIH budget was $39 billion; that means nursing received less

than 1%. In 2018, 691 grant applications were received by the National Institute for Nursing Research (NINR), but only 71 were awarded funding. In 2018, the NINR reported an overall success rate of 10.3%, which is the lowest of any institute or center within the NIH (NIH Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools, 2018ab). Nurse researchers conduct studies that are key to the management of chronic disease, health promotion, and end-of-life care. To persuade Congress to increase fund- ing allocation for the NINR, nursing research needs to be better understood by government leaders and the public with translational research projects conducted in tandem with theoretical research to demonstrate the importance of our work. Working in concert, DNP and PhD graduates can make this happen.
Given the move to fund more interdisciplinary
translational research, the need for well-trained nurse scientists to conduct the research needed to identify or develop effective nursing practices for eliminating gaps and disparities in health care is more apparent than ever (National Academy of Medicine, 2020). Nurse scien- tists and researchers should not confine their research efforts to those funded solely by the NIH and other gov- ernment agencies; rather, they should also seek private sector foundation funding. With the growing cadre of nurses educated at the PhD and DNP levels, a critical mass of expertise is being created that will have a measur- able impact on the advancement of nursing.

Nursing Science With the DNP/PhD Partnership
New doctoral programs in any discipline are not created without much reflection and in-depth analysis. Addi- tional resources or the reallocation of resources from other academic programs are often needed. Currently, most universities that offer the PhD in nursing also offer the DNP, which provides the opportunity for high-level collaboration.
   O’Sullivan and colleagues (2005) rightly raise the argument that because many PhD graduates never con- duct postdoctoral research studies, these PhD-educated nurses might have been better served by the practice doctorate option. fte DNP option now enables those whose passion is for practice to improve practice through evidence-based projects.



The Advanced Practice Nurse: MSN, DNP, or PhD
Luther Christman, a leader and visionary in nursing (1915–2011), proposed through the Rush Unification Model that all nurses have advanced education to prac- tice. His Unification Model incorporated interprofes- sional teams composed of physicians, nurses, and other health professionals practicing together for the benefit of patients. Christman was the dean and vice president of nursing at Rush-Presbyterian University Medical Center in Chicago, where education, practice, and research were evident on every nursing unit (Pittman, 2005). Christman believed that nursing would achieve parity with medicine and other health professionals if all nurses possessed ter- minal degree credentials. Although health-care delivery has changed dramatically since Christman articulated his vision of a Unification Model, certain elements remain constant. It is now well understood that no one profes- sion alone can provide holistic comprehensive interpro- fessional care; instead, health professionals must work collaboratively to ensure the best patient outcomes.
Health-care reform within the context of the PPACA
has enabled many previously uninsured individuals to gain access to health care, increasing the demand for pri- mary and tertiary care services that have increased the de- mand for APNs and primary care physicians. ftis creates a strategic opportunity for APNs to address the needs of society and practice to the full extent of their educational preparation. Attainment of the DNP as the new standard will serve to bring APNs to their rightful position as an equal partner on the interprofessional health-care team. To achieve this goal of parity with the major health pro- fessions, APNs need to unify and strategize to advance to the next level. APNs have the potential to be leaders in the delivery of primary care because physicians are more typically attracted to specialty practice. Using the DNP as entry for advanced practice is a reasonable expectation and goal, which will support excellence in patient care with vastly improved clinical outcomes.

Nurse Practitioner Residency and Fellowship Programs
With the growing impact of federally qualified health centers (FQAC), by 2005 consideration was being given to APN residencies with the view that “NP residency

programs would enable NPs to transcend their midlevel provider status and achieve full professional recognition” (Flinter, 2005). In 2011, the Institute of Medicine report The Future of Nursing: Leading Change Advancing Health recommended residency programs following the comple- tion of an advanced practice degree program (Nicely & Fairman, 2015), which follows the long-standing model of medical education.
   Although studies evaluating the care provided by nurse practitioners have been positive, the context and the complexity of care have evolved. So too have the backgrounds of students entering nurse practitioner pro- grams with many opting to advance directly to graduate study with little or no postgraduate clinical practice.
   Currently, postgraduate clinical programs are pre- dominately residency programs. fte HRSA (2019) has funded 36 APN residencies with most at universities. Fellowships are another option for postgraduate clinical education. Other options include internships and ex- ternships. Internships mainly focus on the clinical edu- cation of new BSN graduates and are typically sponsored by clinical facilities. Externships typically focus on preli- censure students and are often scheduled in the summer months. For APNs, internships are typically included within the curriculum for the MSN or DNP programs. fte APN residency, which many would prefer to call
a fellowship, is needed for important reasons. Currently,
certified and licensed nurse practitioners can begin prac- tice having had far less supervised clinical experience than medical residents. In addition, nurse practitioners are paid far less than their medical resident counterparts. Responding to the increasing complexity of care in recent years, the National Nurse Residency and Training Consortium has taken the lead to offer national accred- itation for both NP residency and fellowship programs (Martsolf et al., 2017). At present, there are 68 identified active postgraduate NP residency and fellowship pro- grams in the United States, of which 31 self-identified as residency programs and 37 as fellowship programs (Martsolf et al., 2017). Most of the residencies are 12 months in length, and many include specialties such as cardiology, oncology, palliative care, and orthopedics
with most having a primary care focus.
   Potential funding for NP residency/fellowship pro- grams is available from the HRSA and from founda- tions such as the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. As NPs come to dominate primary health care, the need



for APN residencies/fellowships will become even more important. Understanding the complexity of patient care needs and achieving the best possible outcomes are within the realm of care provided by nurse practitioners.

SUMMARY

fte specialty organizations for NPs, CNSs, and CRNAs have defined their goals and timelines for adopting the DNP for entry into practice, and the transition is a chal- lenging undertaking. Although the initial 2015 AACN goal for transition to the DNP has long passed, there is a growing movement within the profession to move to the next level. With more than 32,678 currently en- rolled DNP students, the profession is changing. With

the NONPF, NACNS, and AANA endorsing the DNP or DNAP for APNs, we have arrived at the crossroads, beginning radical transformation in the education of APNs from the MSN to the DNP.
   To achieve parity with other major health profession- als, graduates of APN programs must have competencies that hold some level of “extra value,” apart from the MD and the other major health professions. One such com- petency is the clinical research skill of the DNP graduate, which focuses on translational evidence-based projects and projects addressing patient safety issues. ftese kinds of research will allow the DNP-prepared APN to enter key leadership positions. Beyond that, the DNP-educated nurse possesses skills in understanding and advancing health-care system issues, which along with the PPACA, are in the forefront of health-care problems to be solved.















Global Perspectives on Advanced Practice Nursing
Madrean Schober



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Recognize the presence of advanced practice nursing (APN) worldwide.
• Identify themes influencing the increase in APN globally.
• Understand practice issues and challenges faced with newly emerging advanced nursing roles.
• Appreciate the importance of establishing an international consensus on the
meaning of APN.
• Describe the impact of the International Council of Nurses (ICN) in setting international standards.
• Compare country and regional illustrations of APN development.












56



INTRODUCTION

ftere is growing international recognition that ad- vanced practice nursing (APN)* should be developed, acknowledged, and legitimized. Factors contributing to a greater willingness to explore APN options are mul- tifaceted. Physician shortages, increased demand for highly specialized nurses, a greater emphasis on primary health care (PHC) and home-based services, and the in- creased acuity and complexity of hospitalized patients are among the issues motivating decision makers to re- think provision of health-care services (Buchan et al., 2013; Delamaire & LaFortune, 2010; DiCenso et al., 2010; Hassmiller et al., 2020; Sastre-Fullana et al., 2014; Schober, 2016, 2017). Professional growth and develop- ment within nursing are also influencing changes in this field. fte acquisition of higher qualifications as nurses move into the academic education sector is matched by a demand for clinical career ladders or pathways that ac- knowledge professional advancement and give nurses an incentive to remain in clinical practice (Maier & Aiken, 2016; Maier et al., 2017; Schober, 2013, 2016, 2017).
fte predicted global deficit of 12.9 million physicians,
nurses, and midwives by 2035 has stimulated a renewed examination of skill mix, including options for intro- ducing new types of health-care workers; these options include the expansion of current roles for all health-care professionals (McGee, 2019; World Health Organization [WHO], 2014). Historically, Buchan and Calman (2005) identified several drivers in health systems in countries be- longing to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) contributing to a heightened interest in the APN role. In addition to staff shortages faced by these countries, these authors suggest that health sector reform and new initiatives have stimulated serious consideration of the appropriateness of contemporary role definitions for health-care workers and profession- als. Included in these deliberations are factors such as cost containment measures, actions to improve service quality, the introduction of technological innovations, new thera- peutic interventions, and alterations in the legislative and

* Advanced practice nursing (APN) is used as a comprehensive term for the do- main of advanced nursing practice. The term advanced practice nurse (APN) is used in reference specifically to the advanced practice nurse: APN roles, APN practice, APN curriculum, APN positions, or individuals who are APNs.

regulatory environment. fte growing body of literature confirms the diversity in motivation globally for coun- tries considering the option of advanced nursing roles (Delamaire & LaFortune, 2010; Hassmiller et al., 2020; ICN, 2020; Maier & Aiken, 2016; McGee & Inman, 2019; Schober, 2016). See Box 5.1 for a summary of fac- tors contributing to APN growth.
  However, enthusiasm and motivation when redefin- ing roles for health-care professionals is not enough to support a strong climate of advocacy for these changes (Buchan et al., 2013; Schober, 2017). Clarifying who the APN is and the place of an advanced nursing role in the health-care workforce is a theme that takes center stage in the evolving international drama of APN de- velopment. fte WHO in its continued efforts to maxi- mize the capacities and potential of nurses and midwives emphasizes the need to mobilize political will to build effective workforce development (WHO, 2016). fte maturing nature of the APN discipline calls leaders and



Factors Contributing to International Growth in Advanced Practice NursingEscalating disease burden worldwide: communi- cable and noncommunicable diseases
Increased inpatient acuity and complexity of treatment Impact of technological innovations and new
therapeutic approaches
Increased emphasis on PHC and community-based services
Increasing requests for and complexity of home-based care
General global shortage of health-care workers stimulating consideration of skill mix options
Physician shortages
Increased demand for specialized nurses
Nursing’s desire for a clinical career ladder and professional advancement
Better informed health-care consumers Intensified demand for options to address
out-of-control health-care costs
Search to improve quality of and access to health- care services


decision makers to assess country-specific models of gov- ernance that could be effective in influencing optimal practice for APNs (ICN, 2020; Maier, 2015; Maier & Aiken, 2016; Schober, 2017, 2019).
   ftis chapter examines topics influencing the develop- ment of APN globally. fte emergence of diverse roles in different regions of the world, the role of ICN in setting international guidelines, and some of the controversial practice issues affecting the nature of APN are explored. Country illustrations provide examples of growth, prog- ress, governance, and challenges experienced worldwide.

THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF NURSES

fte ICN Nurse Practitioner/Advanced Practice Nursing Network (NP/APNN) was launched in 2000 to follow trends in this field of nursing, act as a resource, support countries developing APN roles, and facilitate research on APN. In 2002, ICN consulted with network mem- bers and provided a definition for advanced practice nurs- ing (ICN, 2008b). Although this definition was initially beneficial, the presence of APN globally has increased significantly; therefore, ICN recognized that it was nec- essary to review and revise its original position to pro- vide role clarity and an improved understanding of what comprises the discipline of APN (Schober & Stewart, 2019). As a result, the newly released ICN Guidelines on Advanced Practice Nursing (ICN, 2020) presents the fol- lowing definition. An advanced practice nurse (APN) is:
. . . a generalist or specialist nurse who has acquired, through additional graduate education (minimum of a master’s de- gree), the expert knowledge base, complex decision-making skills and clinical competencies for Advanced Nursing Practice, the characteristics of which are shaped by the context in which they are credentialed to practice. The two most commonly iden- tified APN roles are CNS and NP (ICN, 2020, p. 6).
   fte ICN guidance paper (ICN, 2020) provides over- arching assumptions that form the foundation for APN regardless of work or practice setting and builds on pre- vious work done by ICN (2008a, 2008b). Assumptions are that all APNs:
• are practitioners of nursing, providing safe and com- petent patient care
• have their foundation in nursing education
• 
have roles or levels of practice that require formal edu- cation beyond the preparation of the generalist nurse (minimum required entry level for the APN is a mas- ter’s degree)
• have roles or levels of practice with increased levels of
competency and capability that are measurable, be- yond that of a generalist nurse
• have acquired the ability to explain and apply the the-
oretical, empirical, ethical, legal, caregiving, and pro- fessional development required for APN
• have defined APN competencies and standards, which
are periodically reviewed for maintaining currency in practice
• are influenced by the global, social, political, eco-
nomic, and technological milieu (ICN, 2020, p. 9)
   In issuing the Guidelines on Advanced Practice Nurs- ing (2020), ICN aims to facilitate ongoing dialogue and support the continued evolution of advanced nursing practice. Gaining clarity and enhanced under- standing of APN can potentially assist governments, policymakers, and health systems with role develop- ment. fte intent of ICN in proposing guidelines is to provide a foundation on which other elements can be built and further refined (Schober & Stewart, 2019). In addition to a definition of APN and an APN, the ICN guidelines contain role characteristics that include education requirements, capabilities, scope of prac- tice, and credentialing under the aegis of a professional standard. See Table 5.1 for ICN-recommended role characteristics.

ADVANCED NURSING PRACTICE: A GROWING GLOBAL PRESENCE


Since the 1990s, ICN has monitored the progress of APN globally. In 1999, in response to an ICN survey sent to 125 member countries, 33 countries reported having nursing roles with advanced practice elements (Schober & Affara, 2006). In a follow-up survey, Roodbol (2004) reported that 60 countries indicated an interest in APN or were in the process of developing advanced practice roles. An ICN survey of 32 countries conducted in 2008 provided additional confirmation of the presence of NP and APN roles internationally while also highlighting some of the challenges encountered


   TaBle 5.1	
International Council of Nurses Characteristics of the Advanced Practice Nurse



Educational Preparation

Nature of PracticeRegulatory Mechanisms (Country-Specific Regulation and Policies Underpinning Advanced Nursing Practice)Educational preparation at an ad-The ability to integrate research, educa-Authority to diagnosevanced level beyond that of ation, and clinical managementAuthority to prescribe medications andgeneralist or specialized nursetreatments(minimum master’s degree)Formal recognition of educa- tional programs preparing nurses specifically for ad- vanced practice nursing (CNS or NP)Extended and broader range of autonomy (country context varies)
The capability to manage full episodes of care and health-care problems
Advanced assessment, judgment, decision making, and diagnostic reasoning skillsAuthority to refer to other services and professionalsA formal system of credential- ing linked to educational qualificationsRecognized advanced clinical competencies
The ability to provide consultant services to other health professionals
Recognized first point of entry for servicesAuthority to admit and discharge to hospital and other services
Title protection
Legislation and policies specific to advanced practice nurses and scope of practiceSource: International Council of Nurses (2020). Guidelines on advanced practice nursing. Geneva, Switzerland.




(Pulcini et al., 2010). At the 2011 ICN Congress in Malta, Roodbol (2011) reported that membership in the ICN NP/APN Network represented 78 countries with an awareness of the APN concept. As of June 2020, ICN reports that membership in the NP/APN Network represents over 100 countries.
  ftis growing level of attention indicates a curiosity in exploring the concept of APN but does not neces- sarily represent an active presence of APN within all countries. Enthusiasm for developing and implement- ing new nursing roles frequently leads key decision makers and nursing leaders to take note of this emerg- ing phenomenon; however, the logistics and complex- ities of promoting, developing, and implementing a new level of nursing in a country’s health-care system is often underestimated (Schober, 2017). fte following section discusses some of the potential challenges. Refer to country exemplars later in this chapter for descrip- tions of the obstacles met and overcome in the process of APN development.

CHALLENGES AND CONTROVERSY


Development and implementation of APN roles is fraught with difficulties, even when there is readiness and support for the integration of this new category of nurses into the health-care workforce. fte following sec- tion identifies some of the key challenges in role develop- ment and realization of the APN concept.

Role Ambiguity and Lack of Role Clarity
Role ambiguity and lack of role clarity are inabilities to define both a scope of practice for the APN and what this nurse will do in the health-care workforce (Donald et al., 2010; Gardner et al., 2007; Schober, 2016, 2017). In the absence of a clearly defined scope of practice, it is difficult to delineate APN accountabil- ity and responsibility. In addition, the lack of a defined identity affects the ability of APNs to communicate clear messages about the nature of their role to clients,



policymakers, other health-care professionals, regula- tors, and educators.

Proliferation of Titles
Identification of the APN globally is plagued by a pro- liferation of titles. ftis diversity leads to confusion and lack of understanding as researchers attempt definitive research and regulators look for guidance when devel- oping professional regulation. In addition, functions and responsibilities vary considerably from one set- ting to another, even when one title is used within the same country (Leary et al., 2017; Pulcini et al., 2010; Schober, 2016). ftis variability adds to the confusion about what title should be applied as distinctive roles emerge in countries in the early stages of role develop- ment. Some titles indicate the specialty of the APN; other titles are developed to fit the context of the sys- tems or the situations in which the APN role exists. fte variety of titles being used reveals the explorative nature and diverse perspectives of advanced practice interna- tionally with respect to the parameters of the role and where it sits in relation to other nurses and professionals in the health-care system (Schober, 2016; Woo et al., 2019).

Lack of Recognition by Other Professionals in the Health-Care System
Medical dominance and control over the provision of health-care services, especially in more developed coun- tries, is cited as a major obstacle to implementing APN roles. In addition, scope of practice conflicts and overlap with other health professionals’ scope of practice, espe- cially medicine, contribute to APNs feeling unwelcome within the health-care team. Interestingly, one particular problem area revealed by research conducted in Singa- pore by Schober (2013) was mistrust between APNs and other nurses. Schober and Affara (2006) had previously identified this sentiment in key informants who reported obstacles to the role arising from other nurses. In the Netherlands, Roodbol (2005) found that even though physicians believed that the APN presence had a positive effect on the social identity of nurses in general, nurses as a whole did not share this view and were not prepared to accept APNs into their professional group. In addition,

Woo et al. (2019) found that even if other nurses had a positive view of APNs, only 30.7% saw themselves be- coming an APN.

Varying Levels of Autonomy
fte degree of autonomy afforded to APNs varies from country to country and even within the same country. ftis appears to be related to the degree of recognition and acceptance of the role and to the type of regulatory mechanisms in place (ICN, 2020; McGee & Inman, 2019; Schober, 2016). fte extension of APN autonomy potentially challenges established professional boundar- ies of other health-care professionals.

Variable Standards and Quality of Education Programs
Historically and up to the present time, educational qualifications for the APN role have varied from the awarding of certificates for post-basic or baccalaureate courses of various lengths to undertaking a formal uni- versity program and obtaining a master’s degree. Educa- tion and preparation beyond the level of the generalist nurse is a critical component in the development of the APN role. fte ICN Guidelines on Advanced Practice Nursing specifies that entry-level education at the mas- ter’s degree level is required (ICN, 2020). See Box 5.2 for the ICN-recommended education standards.

Professional Regulation, Credentialing, and Standard Setting
A professional standard, supportive legislation, and appropriate regulation and policies ultimately provide the underpinnings for successful APN implementation and sustainability. Development of relevant policies, al- though essential, frequently contributes to intense dis- cussion and lengthy debate. fte lag between actual APN practice and supportive legislation can be attributed to uneven starts in initiating new roles and to the diversity of health issues challenging the communities and coun- tries where these roles seek to grow. Also, restrictive reg- ulations that unnecessarily limit the expertise and scope of practice for the APN can affect to what extent ad- vanced practice will be embraced by a health-care system and permit APNs to practice to their fullest capacity. A





International Council of Nurses Standards for Education of the Advanced Practice
     Nurse
Programs prepare the student for practice beyond that of the generalist nurse by including op- portunities to access knowledge and skills as well as demonstrate their integration in clinical practice as a safe, competent, and autonomous practitioner.
Programs prepare the authorized nurse to practice within the nation’s health-care system to the full extent of the role as set out in the APN scope of practice.
Programs are staffed by faculty who are qualified and prepared at or beyond the level of the stu- dent undertaking the program of study.
Programs are accredited or approved by an au- thorized national governmental or nongovern- mental credentialing body.
Programs facilitate lifelong learning and mainte- nance of competencies.
Programs provide student access to a sufficient range of clinical experience to apply and con- solidate, under supervision, the theoretical course content.International Council of Nurses. (2008b, 2020). The scope of practice, stan- dards and competencies of the advanced practice nurse and guidelines on advanced practice nursing. Geneva, Switzerland.


process of evaluation and revision of professional regula- tion may be the only option to follow when regulations are found to hinder optimal professional practice. ftis, in turn, poses another set of challenges as to who has the authority to initiate and the power to supply leverage in provision of solutions in the credentialing and regulatory arena (Schober, 2017).
   National nursing associations and nursing leadership would seem to provide the likely foundation for develop- ment and exploration of educational requirements and standards; however, there appears to be a lack of con- sensus among nursing academics and leaders as to what APN really means, and at times overt support by nursing

bodies is lacking as the roles develop. When nursing lead- ership is lacking, other key decision makers and advisors in turn provide regulatory and credentialing guidance and make policy decisions. International organizations, such as ICN, are taking official organizational positions regarding APN and offer guidance to facilitate a better understanding of APN (ICN, 2020; Schober, 2017).
  In the processes of APN development and implemen- tation, professional regulation often needs to catch up with innovation if understanding of and confidence in the role are to be established for the benefit of key de- cision makers, the profession, and the public. However, the setting up of suitable regulatory mechanisms needs to be approached in such a manner that new problems are not created, health-care systems are not made less ef- ficient, or access is reduced to those who benefit by APN services (Schober, 2017).

Authority to Prescribe Medicines and Therapeutics
Nurse prescribing of medicines or therapeutics describes various types of nursing practice currently undertaken in different countries or regions of the world and is not necessarily exclusive to APN practice. Discussion of this issue focuses on the suitability of prescriptive author- ity for nurses in general and on the appropriateness of nurse prescribing as it relates to defined characteristics and expected competencies for APN roles. Nevertheless, discourse and comment reveal that nurses have been pre- scribing medicines, treatments, and other therapies in certain health-care settings. However, the reality of car- rying out these activities within a legal framework and in a supportive health-care environment, such as one that has enabling workplace policies in place, lags behind the requisites of actual practice. As more countries imple- ment APN roles in a variety of settings, the issue of nurse prescribing is becoming less of a controversial issue.
It appears that advancement for APN and NP roles
necessitates having prescriptive authority, but it is worth noting that health-care services in some areas of the world have, for some time, included nurse prescribing of a range of essential drugs at the first level of practice in primary health-care systems (Ball, 2009). Ball (2009,
p. 67) suggests that the question underlying the topic of nurse prescribing is not “Can nurses prescribe?” in



a particular country, but “To what extent is nurse pre- scribing established?” How nurse prescribing evolves and becomes an integral part of the health-care system is as important as whether or not nurses have the legal au- thority to prescribe (Ladd & Schober, 2018).
   In appraisal of the key global issues associated with nurse prescribing, Ball (2009) indicates that there is little uniformity as to what role nurses should have with regard to prescriptive authority. Educational programs to prepare nurses for prescribing range from master’s degree prepara- tion to a designated program of a few study days. Although these issues are varied, there are common approaches when considering  nurses’  prescriptive  authority.  ftese  include the acceptability of nurse prescribing within the health- care setting, the designation of which nurses will prescribe, and the strategies for implementation and feasibility from an administrative and health policy perspective. fte dif- ferences between countries reflect differences in health- care systems, the population demographics of the country, and the status of nursing (Ball, 2009; Ladd & Schober, 2018). As of June 2020, noting this variance, ICN is in the process of reviewing characteristics of nurse prescribing globally with the intent to provide guidance for the inter- national nursing and health-care communities.

GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE—COUNTRY ILLUSTRATIONS

fte development of APN internationally has progressed significantly in numerous regions of the world. To review this global growth, examples in this section are presented from the diverse experiences of countries introducing, developing, and implementing APN roles. It is acknowl- edged that implementation of APN meets with varying degrees of success and support. To grasp perspectives of emerging development, country illustrations are ar- ranged according to WHO-designated regions. Descrip- tions of country progress and interpretation of APN are intended to provide representative examples of a region but are not meant to portray all activity in any one area of the world. fte author acknowledges that, wherever the concept or level of APN arises, the occurrence of this phenomenon is subject to specific health-care, nurs- ing, and political cultures. fte dynamic authority of leaders within national, local, and institutional settings

ultimately drives policy that impacts the APN role and the manner in which the APN practices.

Africa: WHO-AFRO
fte WHO Regional Office for Africa (WHO-AFRO) is located in Brazzaville, Republic of Congo. Personnel in the office include the WHO regional committee for Africa, a secretariat for the African region, and three in- tercountry support teams. Additional country and liai- son staff are located in 47 member states. ftis section describes the diversity of APN development in the Afri- can continent.
Anglophone Africa Advanced Practice Nurse Coalition Project (AAAPNC)
fte Anglophone Africa Advanced Practice Nurse Coa- lition Project (AAAPNC) was set up in 2018 to coordi- nate a global initiative for APN in Africa. ftis proposal sought support from WHO-AFRO by presenting a per- suasive case for APN development across the continent. fte focus is on the need to prioritize policy and work- force planning within the region to address challenges in health-care delivery. ftese challenges are influenced by the WHO Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (http://www.who.int/sdg/en/) and the pursuit for uni- versal health care.
   While acknowledging that every country in Africa is distinctive, with different burdens of disease and human resources, this project advocates that standardization of education, scope of practice, and regulation of APN be made a priority. It is anticipated that collaboration will extend across national and regional institutions such as National Nurses Associations (NNAs); the East, Central, and Southern Africa College of Nursing (ECSACON); the West African College of Nursing (WACN); East Central Southern Africa College of Physicians; regula- tors; and other interested networks. fte intent of the AAAPNC is to enhance country-based initiatives already in place, not to replace APN efforts that are in progress. fte AAAPNC is an interprofessional coalition seek- ing support from WHO, ICN, Nursing Now, and Jhpiego to be a resource for stakeholder engagement in an effort to build coordination between countries as they develop APN roles. fte ICN Guidelines on Advanced Practice Nursing 2020 (ICN, 2020) is recommended



as one reference point while also taking into consider- ation APN definitions provided by the Centre for the Advancement of Interprofessional Education and the Africa Interprofessional Education Network. As of June 2020, consistent with regional priorities to achieve uni- versal health care, a proposal is in place to pilot Family Nurse Practitioner (FNP) programs in at least five Afri- can countries. fte primary objective is to outline how APNs can benefit African health-care systems, especially in primary care, and to advocate for the development of a common framework for APN (Bongi Sibanda, per- sonal communication, March 25, 2020).
Botswana
In Botswana, a poorly developed health-care system and a severe shortage of physicians following independence in 1966 triggered the need for nurses with advanced skills and decision making to provide services usually as- sociated with physician practice. Nurses accepted these increased responsibilities but demanded further edu- cation to enhance their ability to meet the health-care needs of the country.
  fte Ministry of Health, through the then National Health Institute, responded by establishing the first FNP advanced diploma program in 1981 with the aim to ed- ucate nurses in advanced skills including diagnosis and management of PHC problems common in Botswana. fte program evolved to 18 months of post-basic ed- ucation in 1991, followed by a revision and update in curriculum in 2001 with increased emphasis on com- prehensive family health services (National Health In- surance [NHI], 2002). In 2007, a four-semester format was introduced (Pilane et al., 2007). As of May 2020, the diploma programs at the Institute of Health Sciences (IHS) are at an advanced stage of curricula revision and upgrading to degree levels. At the same time, the master’s program at the University of Botswana (UB) is being re- vised and is expected to address articulation and recog- nition of prior learning from the IHS diploma program. UB offers a master of nursing science (MNSc) degree that includes specialization as an FNP. Although UB has FNP students, the diploma program at the IHS simulta- neously continues to offer an FNP program at the IHS Gabarone and Kanya SDA College of Nursing. Candi- dates for the IHS program must have a diploma in gen- eral nursing (GN) with a minimum of 2 years’ service

as a GN, be registered as a GN with the Nursing and Midwifery Council of Botswana, and be in possession of a Botswana General Certificate of Secondary Education (BGCSE) or its equivalent.
   Because UB offers a master’s degree in nursing science with the option for FNP study, a comparative analysis of the IHS diploma and UB master’s degree curriculum hopes to identify how the two programs could combine common coursework and remove redundant or repeti- tious study while supporting advancement for the FNP educated in the IHS program. ftis is in line with the Articulation Policy of UB. Possibilities for credit transfer and opportunities for challenge examinations or apply- ing for exemption from retaking courses when seeking further study at UB are being considered. In 2019, UB initiated offering a hybrid FNP program planned to kickstart online education. fte online FNP program is hoped to encourage diploma FNPs and nurses outside Gabarone to upgrade themselves while on the job. ftis could ultimately be an advantage to the African continent (M. Kgositau, personal communication, May 19, 2020). Since 1996, UB has offered an MNSc for graduates from several APN specialty tracks, similar to the clinical nurse specialist (CNS), including family health, adult health, community health, psychiatric mental health, and parent and child health. Entry to the master’s pro- gram requires a current or transferable nursing license from the Nursing and Midwifery Council of Botswana (NCMB), an undergraduate degree in nursing, and a minimum of 2 years of professional practice following the first degree in nursing, which may be acquired con- currently with part-time study. fte MNSc program at UB is a 4-semester program consisting of coursework, a research project, a clinical practicum, and an internship (UB School of Graduate Studies Calendar, 2019–2020). Graduates of these MNSc APN specialty programs at UB are eligible for licensure as nurse specialists by the
NMCB (NMCB, n.d.).
   In 2016, Botswana instituted a title-protected licen- sure for APNs called “Nurse Specialist” (NS), requiring a master’s degree. On the APN license, there is an NS designation with an additional subspecialty designation, for example, FNP, community health, psychiatric mental health (NCMB, n.d.).
   NPs in Botswana provide primary care in outpatient departments, clinics, health posts, roadside mobile stops,



and schools, especially in rural areas throughout the country (Gray & Kgositau, 2019). fte health-care envi- ronment in Botswana supports APN autonomy in pro- vision of PHC services as evidenced in nurse-managed facilities and prescribing privileges. Challenges include lack of specific regulations, lack of availability of qual- ified faculty for educational programs, lack of recogni- tion from the public, and lack of a collective bargaining organization.
   Study findings by Seitio-Kgokgwe et al. (2015) con- firm issues associated with lack of central coordination, weak leadership, weak policy and regulatory frame- works, and inadequate resources with a focus on the lack of attention to organizational structure. fte conclusion from this study is that there is an opportunity for the Ministry of Health in Botswana to reorganize and en- hance the associated health-care infrastructure in hopes that this would solidify support for FNPs and nursing. As of May 2020, FNPs in Botswana are planning the establishment of an association that is aimed at assisting in collective bargaining for the improvement of practice (M. Kgositau, personal communication, May 19, 2020).
Eswatini (formerly Swaziland)
Education for nurses in Eswatini commonly begins with a diploma in general nursing science. ftis education al- lows nurses to work in all nursing settings. As a major employer of nurses, the government of Eswatini requires nurses to be additionally prepared for midwifery or community mental health. A 1-year certificate in these specialties is commonly undertaken by nurses as a post- graduate certificate and referred to as a double qualifica- tion (diploma plus the certificate). ftere is incentive, in terms of remuneration, for nurses to pursue the double qualification.
   Nursing education progressed to bachelor’s degree level when the Swaziland Institute of Health Sciences transitioned to the Faculty of Health Sciences under the University of Eswatini. Graduates are prepared in the field of nursing in a 5-year degree program and grad- uate with a Bachelor of Nursing Science degree. In this program, students can choose advanced medical-surgical nursing or community health nursing as majors and midwifery or community mental health as minors. ftis focus meets the requirement (double qualification) of the Ministry of Health as the major employer.
  
Nurses employed by the government occasionally take leave for further education as permitted by the pro- gram plan. Studies are focused on ophthalmology, der- matology, anesthesia, and operating room, for example, but are not considered APN because they are postgrad- uate diplomas.
   With its high prevalence of HIV and pulmonary tuberculosis as well as its noncommunicable disease burden, Eswatini has experienced an acute shortage of nurses and medical practitioners. To meet this need, the University of Eswatini started the FNP master’s program with a vision to qualify nurses to provide PHC to the Eswatini population. fte program was developed and aligned with the Eswatini national health priorities and commenced in the academic year 2017–2018. As of May 2020, there are three cohorts in the program. fte first cohort will have completed their internship and ex- pected to graduate in October 2020. An additional APN program is the master’s in midwifery, which prepares stu- dents in the role of advanced practice midwives. Both the FNP and midwifery scopes of practice have been ap- proved by the Eswatini Nursing Council.
APN is still in its infancy in Eswatini and will be fur-
ther established in the future when there is a larger pool of nurses with advanced education. fte interest in APN ed- ucation among nurses is high; however, there are barriers to continued study. ftese barriers include lack of finances and issues with the education plan within the Ministry of Health. Unless a nurse is approved to be in the educa- tion plan, they will not be released to further their edu- cation on full pay. Many resort to part-time study, which presents its own challenges. fte choice of study program is also driven by government incentives. For example, a nurse who had previously studied advanced midwifery will be posted in the maternity section and receive credit for what the nurse had studied (B. Nsibandze, personal communication, May 27, 2020).
Ghana
fte School of Nursing and Midwifery at the University of Ghana has offered a Master of Philosophy (MPhil) in Nursing since 2000. In addition, a Master of Sci- ence (MSc) in nursing has existed since 2005, educating CNSs and nurse researchers in nursing specialties such as adult health and pediatrics (University of Ghana, 2016). fte University of Cape Coast more recently started



offering an MSc degree specifically in advanced practice nursing. ftis program prepares practicing nurses aca- demically to function as advanced practitioners in the organization and delivery of nursing care. In addition to advanced practice core courses, the curriculum offers specialized advanced education and practicums in nurs- ing specialties of adult health, public/community health, mental health, pediatrics, obstetrics, nursing anesthesia, and critical care (University of Cape Coast, 2020). ftis program allows for additional nursing licensure in one of the specialty areas by the Nursing and Midwifery Coun- cil of Ghana (NMCG, 2016, 2020).
Nurses in Ghana, at times out of necessity, often
practice in an advanced clinical capacity and are given extended roles through task-shifting, especially in rural settings where there are no physicians. ftese nurses are expected to take on roles similar to the APN without any form of training or licensure (Adu-Gyamfi et al., 2016; Okyere et al., 2017). With a view to the future, the country hopes to progress in following international guidelines for development of APN (D. Gray, personal communication, May 26, 2020).
Republic of South Africa (RSA)
fte key challenges for NPs in RSA lie in lobbying for enabling legislation, obtaining access to education and training opportunities, and managing risks within the rapidly changing environment. Since 1994, the transi- tion from a mainly hospital-based health-care service to increased emphasis on PHC and community-based ser- vices increased the visibility of the NP. fte creation of a more unified health-care system, while dealing with rapid change in the health-care environment, posed challenges and opportunities for the primary clinical practitioner (PCP). PCP has been used as a title for NPs in the RSA; however, with the development and introduction of new qualifications after 2016, the title became FNP.
fte RSA’s 2005 Nursing Act and its regulations call
for NPs to possess required competencies. Standards for the education and training of nurses and midwives were also established. Basic preparation for FNPs follows ac- quisition of a 4-year degree for general nursing and mid- wifery followed by a specialization program in diagnosis, treatment, and care. However, the rapid acceleration in use of nurses in PHC services and the general shortage of nurses have resulted in FNPs who have not received

specialist education other than short courses in the initi- ation and management of antiretroviral therapy (ART). fterefore, one of the challenges is providing sufficient access to education to ensure nurses in the FNP role have the required competence to provide high-quality care.
  fte scope-of-practice regulations produced by the South African Nursing Council in 1984 provided prac- tice principles that support nurses and midwives to “per- form any acts for which they have been trained.” fte FNP scope of practice is written in such a way that it emphasizes the provision of comprehensive clinical ser- vices such as the following:
• Comprehensive assessment
• Diagnosis of health and disease, especially diseases common in the RSA
• Treatment and management (pharmacological and
nonpharmacological)
• Referral to other professionals
• Counseling
• Leadership and management
• Health promotion and disease prevention
   However, the legal framework for the FNP has not evolved as rapidly as practice. As of May 2020, a new scope of practice for nursing is under consideration. (See the first numbered item in Box 5.3.) ftis scope will make a clear distinction between the roles for profes- sional nurses, general nurses, and auxiliary nurses and will also provide the basis for progression to specialist nurse and FNP scopes of practice. fte South African Nursing Council has revised the qualifications frame- work for nurses to align them with changes in education legislation that transfers all nursing programs to higher education. fte specialist nurse has been described in leg- islation but not the NP/FNP.
fte FNP scope of practice overlaps with that of other
health practitioners, such as physicians and pharma- cists. Dispensing of drugs falls under the pharmacist’s function; whereas, prescribing drugs is exclusive to the physician, unless the practitioner or professional, such as a nurse, has been authorized to prescribe by his or her respective councils or regulatory bodies. Nurses are listed as one of these professions (see items 3 and 4 in Box 5.3). While the regulations for authorizing nurses to prescribe are in development, the Nursing Act 2005 currently provides the Director General of Health the





Developments for Nurse Practitioners in the
     Republic of South Africa
1. fte scope of practice has been structured for three categories of nurses within a framework of professional-ethical practice, clinical prac- tice, and quality of practice. ftis lends itself to developing a structured scope that progresses to the next levels of specialist nurses and NPs.
2. Educational programs linked to this scope will prepare professional nurses, who will be independent/autonomous practitioners, to as- sume responsibility and accountability for man- aging and providing comprehensive nursing treatment and care of persons in all health set- tings within the ethical-legal framework. Profes- sional nurses can specialize in a variety of areas, including family nurse practice. A criterion has been built in that no nurse can specialize until he or she has a 2-year clinical experience (this includes 1 year of community service after com- pletion of basic training plus 1 additional year of clinical practice).
3. Although there is a new Nursing Act, the pro-
fession has not managed to get rid of govern- ment control regarding the authorization of nurses to prescribe. Section 56 of the Nursing Act of 2005 places more controls into the sys- tem; nurses will now be licensed to prescribe and reapply for licensing.
4. As of May 2020, work is currently in process on regulations for nurse prescribing—likely to be according to protocols.

power to authorize nurses to prescribe treatment. A nurse who wishes to dispense medicines must undergo a course accredited with the pharmacy council. Applica- tion for a license to dispense medication is made through the national Department of Health. fte license is valid for 3 years, after which reapplication is required.
   NPs in the RSA are mainly employed in the public health sector at the provincial and local authority level.

Nurses and midwives provide the majority of health services with nurses identified as the first point of con- tact for preventive health and minor ailments. With the growing need for home-based care, resulting mainly from the epidemic levels of HIV and AIDS, nurses and NPs are increasingly holding leadership and supervisory re- sponsibilities for other workers and volunteers in health- care systems. fte publication of a bill on NHI for the country includes roles for NPs as well as contracting for private practitioners that is said to include nurses. ftis is where the NP can make a significant contribution.
  Establishing collaborative practice in the RSA is fraught with difficulty because practice acts and regula- tions governing each category of health-care professional pose a significant barrier. Health-care practitioners can employ each other, but stipulations within regulations prohibit group practice. Such limitations either discour- age formation of multiprofessional groups or require de- velopment of involved legal contracts to bypass the rules. Conflict arises when existing scopes of practice overlap with those of other professions, thus contributing to lack of support for the development of advanced nursing roles. ftis situation has interfered with legislative sup- port for FNP practice and expanded nurse dispensing and prescribing (N. Geyer, personal communication, May 18, 2020).
Western Africa
fte scope of practice for an NP in West Africa (WA) is very similar to that of the NP role described in other countries (Madubuko, 2016). However, even though more than 1,000 nurses have master’s degrees, advanced education is not recognized in the nursing register. All registered nurses (RNs) possess a post-basic nursing edu- cation and clinical training in midwifery (registered mid- wife [RM]). fterefore, RNs have additional advanced education in at least one specialty area—for instance, in the psychiatric, perioperative, nurse education, orthope- dic, gynecological, thoracic, or pediatric field. fte WA College of Nursing has accredited the University of Be- nin Teaching Hospital’s School of Ophthalmic Nursing for an 18-month master’s degree for ophthalmic NPs that is consistent with the global NP movement. It is hoped that the nurses in WA—with time, explanation, and lobbying—will obtain official recognition for ad- vanced education and clinical practice.



   An RN or RM is certified by national certification ex- amination and provides direct PHC. fte scope of prac- tice includes obtaining a history, performing a physical examination, diagnosing and treating common illnesses, performing illness-prevention screenings, and promoting health. Education and counseling are provided in col- laboration with other health professionals. Health-care reforms have stimulated interest in more relevant health- care services in WA, thus providing an opportunity for RNs and RMs and other health professionals in NP-like roles (Madubuko, 2016).

The Americas: WHO-PAHO
fte Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) is part of the United Nations system, serving as the Regional Office for the Americas of the WHO and as the health organization of the Inter-American System. fte PAHO sets health priorities within the Region of the Americas, including the Caribbean countries, and works to build capacity to address regional health-care problems (Cas- siani et al., 2020). fte following descriptions provide examples of successful and emerging APN activity in this region.
Canada
fte Canadian Nurses Association (CNA) continues to provide leadership for the development and implemen- tation of APN in Canada. In 1999, the CNA developed a framework for APN that was subsequently revised in 2002, 2008, and 2019. fte framework provides the fol-
lowing definition (CNA, 2019, p. 13):
Advanced practice nursing is an umbrella term describing an advanced level of clinical nursing practice that integrates the use of graduate educational preparation, in-depth nursing knowledge and specialized clinical nursing knowledge and expertise in meeting the health needs of individuals, families, groups, communities and populations. It involves analyzing and synthesizing knowledge; critiquing, interpreting and ap- plying nursing theory; participating in and leading research from nursing and other disciplines; and use of advanced clinical competencies and developing and advancing nursing knowledge and the profession as a whole.
   According to this framework, it is the combination of graduate education and clinical experience that allows nurses to develop the competencies required for APN

(CNA, 2019). Core competencies essential to APN are outlined in the framework as providing direct compre- hensive care, optimizing health systems, educating, re- searching, leading, consulting, and collaborating.
   Nurses in Canada are regulated at the provincial or territorial level. fte only APN role with additional reg- ulation and title protection beyond the RN is the NP with the exception of the Clinical Nurse Specialist in Infection Control and Prevention in Quebec. NPs are educated in both nursing theory and medical skills and possess the knowledge and skills to autonomously diag- nose, order and interpret diagnostic tests, prescribe treat- ment (including drugs), and perform specific procedures within their legislated scope of practice (CNA, 2016b).
   fte implementation of the NP role regained momen- tum following an 18-month federally funded, CNA-led Canadian Nurse Practitioner Initiative (CNPI) con- ducted from 2004 to 2006. ftis initiative helped in the development of a framework for the integration and sus- tainability of the NP role in Canada’s health-care system. Recommendations for practice, education, legislation, regulation, and health human resources planning were provided because of findings from the CNPI (CNA, 2009a).
   In 2009, the CNA consulted with stakeholders on the progress made in meeting the recommendations generated from the 2006 CNPI (CNA, 2006). fte main purpose of the consultation was to compile information on the activities of governments, nongovernmental orga- nizations, and other stakeholders at the federal and pro- vincial levels in relation to the CNPI recommendations. fte consultation process revealed that although more than half of the actions concerning the CNPI recom- mendations had been fully or partially completed, sev- eral key actions remained ongoing. fte findings of the consultation process are outlined in Recommendations of the Canadian Nurse Practitioner Initiative Progress Report. Among the remaining identified challenges to NP inte- gration, continued advocacy was needed on federal leg- islative or policy barriers (e.g., prescribing of controlled drugs and substances, distribution of drug samples, completion of medical forms for disability claims and workers’ compensation) (CNA, 2009b).
In 2016, the CNA reported significant progress
on several recommendations of the CNPI and overall evolution of the NP role (CNA, 2016b). NPs are now



practicing in a wide variety of settings and in various models of care. ftere is expansion of their scope of prac- tice, pan-Canadian title protection, a common role de- scription, and professional liability coverage. fte CNA advocacy work enabled changes to federal legislation and regulations to allow NPs to provide a wider range of care and services that enhance patient-centered care while re- ducing health-care costs (CNA, 2017a, 2017b).
   CNSs in Canada are “registered nurses with advanced nursing knowledge and skills in making complex deci- sions. fte CNS holds a master’s or doctoral degree in nursing with expertise in a clinical nursing specialty” (CNA, 2016a, p. 1). fte CNS role was introduced to respond to increased patient need and the demand for nursing specialization as well as to support nursing prac- tice at the point of care. fte CNS role has been part of the Canadian health-care system for more than four de- cades (DiCenso, 2008); however, researchers in Canada report that CNSs are not fully utilized. Because the title is not protected, it is difficult to report accurately on the presence of the CNS in Canada (Kilpatrick et al., 2013). CNS practice varies in each health-care jurisdiction in Canada, and the title clinical nurse specialist is used in- consistently. fte CNA led the development of the first Core Competencies for the CNS in Canada (CNA, 2014). Roundtable discussion identified that the varied use of the CNS role stems from confusion about what it entails. Yet, there is significant evidence demonstrating the positive contributions that CNSs make to the health of Canadians (CNA, 2016a).
Several tools have been developed to assist with
the implementation of Canadian APN roles: the CNPI implementation and evaluation toolkit (CNA, 2006) and the Participatory, Evidence-Based, Patient- Centered Process for Advanced Practice Role Devel- opment, Implementation and Evaluation (PEPPA framework [Bryant-Lukosius & DiCenso, 2004], Peppa- Plus [Bryant-Lukosius et al., 2016]). ftese tools serve as a structured and practical guide in assessing the need and readiness for APN roles based on the population health needs of Canadians. In 2010, DiCenso and colleagues published research titled the Clinical Nurse Specialists and Nurse Practitioners in Canada: A Decision Support Synthesis. fte report provides an understanding of the roles of APNs, the contexts in which APNs are being used, and the health system factors that influence the

way in which APN is being integrated into the Canadian health-care system (DiCenso et al., 2010).
  In response to the first-ever State of the World’s Nursing Report released by the WHO in collaboration with the ICN, the CNA acknowledges the importance of developing advanced practice roles to ensure that the nursing workforce is evolving and reflects the health- care needs of Canadians. In Canada, these roles include the CNS and the nurse practitioner (NP). ftere remain many opportunities to continue to optimize these nurs- ing roles to best meet changing population and complex community health-care needs (CNA, 2020).
Cayman Islands
fte emergence of APN services in the Cayman Islands provides an example of how NP-like roles evolve and develop in response to the needs of the people as well as within geographical circumstances. fte initiation of NP-like services started in 1930 with provision of care by a local midwife to meet community health needs. Physician services were scarce, and conditions were primitive with populations residing in remote locations. NP services progressed with the official employment of a nurse experienced in midwifery and community health to provide PHC. Comprehensive health-care services were provided in homes, schools, and clinic settings (Slocombe, 2000).
Expansion of clinical expertise progressed rapidly
during subsequent years with the nurse as the main health-care provider on the islands. fte nurse diagnosed, treated, prescribed, and dispensed what was viewed as necessary. Conditions receiving care were “whatever walked in through the door” (M. Slocombe, personal communication, 2002). Immunization, antenatal, well- baby, nutritional, diabetic, and hypertensive clinics were held with backup consultation and collaboration provided by phone call to the nearest hospital or by ap- pointment with periodic visiting physicians. fte nurse took on the multifaceted role and duties of counselor, administrator, staff supervisor, health educator, accoun- tant, and secretary. Absence of adequate support by other professionals, lack of resources, and limited educa- tional opportunities created frustration and obstacles to professional development.
fte location of the three Cayman Islands, situated
in the Caribbean Sea between Jamaica and Cuba,



contributes to the diversity as well as the unique- ness of commonly seen conditions. Cuban refugees and rafters trickle in for health screenings and health care; periodic care for prison inmates is provided; and hurricane evacuation preparedness is essential for the health centers. fte tourist industry, with visitors from more than 80 countries, requires the nurse to be knowledgeable about trauma and injuries related to deep sea diving (Slocombe, 2000). fte Cayman Is- lands continue to register APNs and NPs to work at facilities on the islands (L. Joseph, personal communi- cation, June 22, 2016).
Jamaica
In 1973, the Nurses Association of Jamaica (NAJ) held exploratory meetings with the Ministry of Health (MOH) to discuss the training of NPs in the country. Interest in the NP concept came as a response to the shortage of physicians needed to provide cost-effective health care to economically disadvantaged people in ru- ral and underserved areas. Following these discussions, the NAJ then submitted a proposal for the establishment of an NP program that was accepted by the MOH. In 1977, the first NP program came into being under the joint auspices of the MOH and the Department of Social and Preventive Medicine within the Faculty of Medicine with the Advanced Nursing Education Unit (ANEU) providing a director.
fte MOH with ANEU administered the program with
the Department of Advanced Nursing Education (DANE) later having responsibility for the curriculum. fte program was initially a certificate program. In keeping with cur- rent trends in nursing education worldwide, the program was transferred in 2002 to the Department of Advanced Nursing Education (now the University of the West Indies School of Nursing [UWISON]) where it is being offered at the master’s degree level. Since the inception of the pro- gram in Jamaica, many NPs from other Caribbean coun- tries have been educated at UWISON in Jamaica.
   NPs in Jamaica have been providing nursing and medical care to all age groups both within health-care delivery systems and in communities since 1978. Most NPs function in primary care health centers. As of April 2020, there were five NPs in clinical practice as family and mental health/psychiatric NPs. Nurse anes- thetists (NA) are technically classified as NPs. fte NA

program has been offered at the master’s degree level since 2014.
   Despite these achievements, NPs and NAs are not registered or licensed as APNs and have no prescrip- tive privileges. All NPs and NAs are registered as nurses and midwives. ftey have no official authority in the expanded role. Prescriptions must be countersigned by physicians. NPs, NAs, the Nursing Council of Jamaica, and other stakeholders on the island continue to work diligently to promote an agenda to enact policies sup- portive of advanced nursing roles (H. McGrath, personal communication, April 23, 2020).

Latin America
Historically, in Latin America most nurses are educated at a baccalaureate level as licensed nurses or RNs. Nurses in rural areas often provide primary care services to under- served populations, essentially practicing in an advanced practice role. However, many lack formal skills training, a defined role, and graduate-level education to support this degree of independent practice (Nigenda et al., 2010). In 2014, a PAHO strategy for universal access to health and universal health coverage outlined key strategies for im- proving universal health, including moving forward with an agenda for implementation of the APN roles.
   In 2015, an Advanced Practice Nursing Summit was hosted by the PAHO/WHO and the Collaborating Center in Primary Health Care & Health Human Re- sources at McMaster University in Hamilton, Canada. Participants from across Latin America highlighted the contributions of nursing with specific focus on APN roles and outlined priorities for APN implementation (PAHO, 2015). fte overall goal for this summit was to identify the APN role in the promotion of PHC in the Americas. In addition to defining the scope of nursing roles and APN, one specific objective was to develop strategies to address gaps in health services and unmet population needs. It was acknowledged that changes in nurses’ roles and responsibilities can leverage APN ex- pertise (PAHO, 2015).
Five planning priorities were identified from the
2015 PAHO summit. ftey are:
• Establish master’s-level APN education programs.
• Engage and influence decision makers, legislators, and other key stakeholders.



• Focus on APN service delivery for underserved popu- lations with high needs.
• Establish a Pan American collaborative network to de-
velop and implement the APN role.
• Define and optimize complementary RN and APN roles in new models of primary health care (PAHO, 2015, p. 9).
   fte 2015 PAHO summit promoted collaboration be- tween nursing leaders and institutions in North America and Latin America. In February 2016, the Faculty of Nursing at Pontificia Universidad Javeriana in Colombia hosted a celebration of its 75-year anniversary titled “Posibilidades y Realidades de la Práctica Avanzada en Enfermería en Colombia Frente a la Cobertura Universal en Salud” (Possibilities and Realities of Advanced Practice Nursing in Colombia in the Face of Universal Health Cov- erage) in Bogota, Colombia. A PAHO representative par- ticipated and met with nursing leaders and the MOH to discuss ways to facilitate APN in Colombia (Facultad de Enfermería, 2016; Schober, 2016). Between 2017 and 2019, the PAHO launched three key documents: “Ex- panding the Role of Nurses in Primary Health Care,” “Doctoral Education in Nursing in Latin America and the Caribbean,” and “Strategic Directions for Nursing in the Region of the Americas” (Cassiani et al., 2020, p. 116).
   In Chile, since the time of the PAHO 2015 summit, the University of the Andes launched a master’s de- gree Nurse Practitioner in Adult Acute Care program. Although the program is focused on the APN role in tertiary rather than primary care, it is a historical step as the first program in Latin America to educate grad- uates in line with the ICN definition of an APN. fte program is a collaboration with Johns Hopkins Hospital and School of Nursing in the United States. In addition to required clinical hours in Chile, students have the possibility to participate in a 2-week internship at Johns Hopkins Hospital shadowing an NP or NS in order to understand the role and observe their practice (Magíster en Práctica Avanzada de Enfermería, 2016). Since this time, additional universities in Chile are working on de- velopment of APN, especially as CNSs in critical care. As of June 2020, the University of San Sebastian in Santi- ago de Chile is offering a CNS program in oncology and critical care. fte program was scheduled to commence in October 2020 (P. Espinoza, personal communication, June 5, 2020).
  
Many challenges in Latin America impede progress toward APN development and implementation. ftere continue to be few nursing levels or roles that would be considered advanced practice. In May 2020, rep- resentatives from universities in 11 Latin American countries (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay) discussed via virtual conferencing issues that need to be addressed in order to move APN for- ward (P. Espinoza, personal communication, May 28, 2020). ftese issues include lack of recognition of the significant role nursing has in strengthening health- care systems, the development of postgraduate nurs- ing education in countries where there may not have been existing graduate nursing courses, and changing policy to allow APNs to practice to their full scope of practice. Although specifics vary by country, common themes include a need for improved political support and the desire for expanding nursing autonomy in clinical practice.
fte PAHO/WHO continues to advocate for action
to strengthen the nursing workforce in Latin America. Strategies include (Cassiani et al., 2020, p. 116):
• Strengthening and consolidating nursing leadership and strategic management
• Addressing working conditions and capacities in
nursing
• Improving the quality of nursing education
   ftere is growing interest in the expansion of nursing roles in Latin America. However, it is a long path into the future for APN that will require step-by-step collab- oration between countries, nursing leaders, and policy decision makers.

Eastern Mediterranean Region: WHO-EMRO
fte Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office (EMRO) of the WHO serves 22 countries and territories in the Middle East, North Africa, the Horn of Africa, and Cen- tral Asia. In June 2001, the regional director of nursing for EMRO convened the Fifth Meeting of the Regional Panel on Nursing to discuss APN and nurse prescrib- ing (WHO-EMRO, 2001). Countries represented at the 3-day workshop in Islamabad, Pakistan, included Bahrain, Cyprus, Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jordan,



Lebanon, Oman, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, United Arab Emirates, and the Repub- lic of Yemen. Twenty-two representatives from nursing, medicine, pharmacy, and ministries of health gathered to begin to develop a regional policy framework for APN and mechanisms for nurse prescribing. fte regional panel highlighted factors leading to development of the roles as well as identifying strategies for the region (WHO-EMRO, 2001). Obstacles to and support for the development of APN and nurse prescribing are provided in Table 5.2.
   Strategies were formulated for APN development and include the following:
• Assessment of need and cost-effectiveness for APN roles in the region
• Development of APN curriculum and standards of
practice
• Definition of the role and identification of related re- vision of nurse practice acts to cover APN
   Significantly, there is consensus that authority for nurse prescribing of a range of essential drugs is an ac- tivity that could be allocated at some level to the com- petent general nurse and does not necessarily depend on the development of APN. On the other hand, authority to prescribe was acknowledged as one of the many ar- eas of expertise associated with APN roles. In addition, it was agreed that these nursing roles require advanced

education, regulatory changes, and expansion of tradi- tional nursing.
   Recommendations were made for the WHO-EMRO (2001) to provide guidelines to assist countries in the re- gion that are in the process of developing and strengthen- ing APN at all levels of health care. Additional assistance was requested from the WHO to initiate and coordinate pilot projects to evaluate the impact and cost-effectiveness of related change when introducing new nursing roles and nurse prescribing. As of June 2020, the progress in this region has been uneven and limited because of ongo- ing conflicts; even so, there continues to be interest and progress toward the advancement of nursing. ftis initial meeting in Pakistan stimulated interest and discussion in the region that continues in Bahrain, Jordan, Oman, Pakistan, and the United Arab Emirates (F. Aldarazi, per- sonal communication, May 12, 2020).
In recent years, to provide guidance on APN and
nurse specialization to the countries in the region, a framework for the development of nursing specialties and advanced practice was developed as an outcome of the regional consultation on nursing education in 2013 (WHO-EMRO, 2013). Consensus was reached on what constitutes a nursing specialty, the definition of a nurse specialist, criteria for designating a specialty, and levels of nursing specialist practice; description of the level of practice; proposed professional titles; educational requirements and regulatory mechanisms. fte guide,



   TaBle 5.2	
WHO-EMRO Consensus on Factors Influencing Advanced Practice Nursing Development

ObstaclesSupportLack of a regional definition and role ambiguityIncreased population and community needs for health-care servicesAbsence of country-level educational or regulatory systems to support such rolesImproving levels of nursing educationNo feasibility studies for ANP needsDesire in the region to improve quality of care and accessNo awareness of the role among the public and health professionalsResearch studies from outside the region supportive of advanced nursing practiceAbsence of nursing leadership at the policy levelCommitment of WHO toward development and use of nursing rolesSource: Adapted from World Health Organization—Eastern Mediterranean Region. (2001). Fifth meeting of the regional advisory panel on nursing and consultation on advanced practice nursing and nurse prescribing: Implications for regulation, nursing education and practice in the Eastern Mediterranean. WHO-EM/NUR/348/E/L. Cairo, Egypt.



published in 2018, is being used to foster development of APN in the region (Al-Darazi & Al-Maqbali, 2020; WHO-EMRO, 2018).

Bahrain
Following the WHO-EMRO meeting in Pakistan in 2001, Bahrain received additional consultative support coordinated by the WHO-EMRO to assess the coun- try’s readiness for APN (Schober, 2007). Consultation services found a stable organizational structure for health-care service provision within PHC. Two pediat- ric APNs educated in NP programs in the United States had started working in pediatric specialties in a hospital. Additional NPs, also educated in the United States, are faculty at the College of Health Sciences (CHS).
   fte CHS has had an RN-Bachelor of Science in Nurs- ing (BSN) degree for some years and established a 4-year BSN program in 2003. fte BSN is now considered entry-level education for nursing practice in Bahrain. With proper planning, this places the CHS in an ideal position to develop an APN master’s degree program. Post-basic 1-year education in midwifery, community health nursing, psychiatric nursing, cardiac care nursing, and emergency nursing is available in the country.
   Until recent years, nurses interested in APN edu- cation were sponsored by Bahrain’s MOH to study in the United States or elsewhere. In 2014, a generic mas- ter’s degree in nursing program was established at the Royal College of Surgeons Ireland-Medical University of Bahrain. In 2018, a master of science in adult health nursing program was established at the CHS. fte pro- gram aims to graduate APNs who can practice compe- tently in a variety of health-care settings (F. Al-Darazi, personal communication, May 12, 2020).
   Bahrain faces certain challenges in developing an APN role suitable for its health services:
• Identifying services that could be provided by APNs or NPs
• Developing an educational plan that meets the needs
of the current workforce while properly planning for potential APN roles
• Constructing strategies to ensure faculty are ade-
quately qualified to deliver APN education
• Establishing standards and regulations supportive of APN roles
  
In 2007, nurses were observed to be functioning in an advanced capacity in triage centers but were not using the terms NP or APN. Nurses were educated in the United States for NP roles. However, they were em- ployed in hospital-based units and faced confusion by other health-care professionals as they worked to estab- lish a new nursing role.
   A survey of primary care physicians (PCPs) conducted in Bahrain (Nasaif, 2012) to assess their knowledge of the NP role found that the PCPs had a poor under- standing of the NP role. fte conclusion was that more education and orientation to the NP role was needed to fully implement this concept. As of June 2020, it is unclear the extent of progress toward inclusion of the NP or APN role, even though there has been contin- ued interest in role development (F. Al-Darazi, personal communication, May 12, 2020).
Iran
fte first step toward advanced nursing in Iran occurred in 1976 with the initiation of a master’s in nursing sciences (MNS) in the areas of nursing education and nursing administration with four subspecialties fo- cused in psychiatric, pediatric, community health, and medical-surgical nursing. At the time, 14 schools of nursing offered a master’s degree in nursing. In 1995, there were 10 doctoral degree (PhD) programs in Iran that graduated 40 individuals to be hired for clinical and academic positions in hospitals, community centers, and universities.
   fte Farsi term Karshenasae-e-Arshad translates to “advanced specialist” and is recognized by physicians in major cities for nurses practicing in advanced roles and direct patient care. In rural areas, Iranian nurses with graduate-level education practice autonomously, similar to APNs in most states in the United States. A practice permit is issued by the Iranian MOH that al- lows advanced specialty nurses to open their own private practice clinics as centers for nursing services. However, physicians supervise the scope of practice.
   Society’s needs for health-care services determine cur- riculum content in academic nursing programs in Iran. In 2008, the curriculum included emphasis on geriatric, rehabilitation, women’s health, neonatal health, mili- tary, and oncology nursing at the graduate level. Short- term continuing nursing education courses were made



available by the MOH for positions in school nursing, home health, intensive care, wound care, ostomy care, HIV/AIDS, and geriatric care.
   In 2016, there were 181 schools of nursing in Iran; 91 were government supported, and 90 were privately owned. Seven thousand students graduated yearly with a baccalaureate of science in nursing (BSc). fte num- ber of postgraduate nursing majors has increased with 12 nursing majors at the master’s level in different spe- cialty areas and one major at the doctoral (PhD) level. In 2020, nursing programs offering master of nursing sciences (MSc) degrees under the universities of health ministry and private universities numbered 192 (Azad). In addition, 50 universities offer a PhD in nursing. As of June 2020, 10,000 students have graduated with a bac- calaureate of science in nursing (BSc), a master’s degree (MSc) in nursing, or a PhD in nursing. fte number of students accepted for various nursing specialties changes every year to meet the social health-care needs of the country (M. Fooladi, M. Shahriari, & F. Sharif, personal communication, June 19, 2020).
Oman
Inspired in 2000 by a meeting of representative countries of the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMR) fo- cused on advanced nursing capacity, nurse prescribing, and nursing leadership, Oman decided to introduce the APN/NP concept. fte director of nursing services for the WHO in Cairo simultaneously promoted APN roles in the region, including support for the interest in Oman. fte driving forces for APN in Oman included a shortfall in physicians, especially in the PHC settings, both in numbers and specific expertise. In addition, emerging health problems caused by lifestyle changes, increases in life expectancy, and the global trend of mov- ing care closer and deeper into the community caught the attention of the MOH.
Early development of the APN role was initiated in
2004. Support for the role was articulated by a WHO short-term consultant, following a review of the PHC delivery system in the country. A situation analysis was then conducted in 2005 followed by further consul- tations and workshops with health-care professionals and key stakeholders in 2006 and 2007. Reports pro- vided to the WHO-EMRO and the MOH in Oman demonstrated high utilization and heavy patient load

for physicians in larger health centers with resultant restricted access to PHC services, leading to potential poor outcomes and patient-provider dissatisfaction. In the many smaller and rural health centers, nurses were found to function in a context that includes minor di- agnosis and treatment. ftus, when there is no physician in the health centers, nurses are providing care beyond the scope of practice of their generalist nurse education. fte WHO consultants noted these conditions, and a proposal was made by the WHO-EMRO in 2008 to develop the APN role at the primary, secondary, and tertiary levels of care.
fte Directorate General of Nursing Affairs for the
MOH took a triangulated approach to gather evidence and support the development of the APN role. In 2010, a situational analysis of the extended role of the pri- mary care nurses was conducted. Information in terms of specific advanced practice skills was gathered and analyzed. In 2011, more information was gathered to support the development of advanced nursing capacity by utilizing techniques that engaged key stakeholders from service, education, and professional regulation. fte discussions were supplemented by a review of rel- evant international literature. ftis was complemented by a study to assess the perceptions of the health-care professionals on the role of APN in 2010. fte results of these analyses and discussions continued to demon- strate support for the introduction of APN. In 2012, another follow-up visit by two WHO consultants took place. fte aim of this visit was to review and analyze previous documents and reports related to APN and to meet with decision makers, educators, and practice nurses. Two recommendations resulted from the 2012 visit that emphasized actions to develop the APN role and to educate nurses already functioning in an ex- tended capacity in PHC.
In 2016, a further WHO consultancy resulted in de-
velopment of an “on-the-job training” (OJT) program for nurses practicing in an extended capacity as well as the development of the scope and standards of prac- tice, service delivery structure, practice environment, and legal framework for the APN. A 27-week OJT program for nurses practicing in the extended role in PHC was developed by the task force and initiated in October 2017. fte aim of the program was to provide all nurses practicing in PHC settings with  knowledge



and skills appropriate to their practice. fte participants were from different parts of the sultanate where the ex- tended role was practiced. A total of 10 nurses were trained initially with front-loaded theory in six modules including physical assessment, basic pathophysiology, pharmacology, differential diagnosis, case management, and specific skills. ftis was supplemented by a work- based portfolio developed by each participant. A team of relevant experts in the PHC field was assigned to teach the program. In June 2019, 22 more nurses were trained in the OJT program with another training held in July 2020.
ftere is long-term interest by the MOH to eventually
establish an Omani NP program within the country. In July 2016, the first APN educated in an NP program in the United States began practice in Oman. Following her, six others were educated in the United States in various sub- specialties including adult-gerontology (PHC and acute care), primary pediatrics, psychiatric mental health, acute care, and primary care. With the support of these nurses, the task force further developed the scope of practice for these specialties. Currently, the MOH provides scholar- ships for two nurses to train as CNSs each year. With this, Oman is moving forward toward establishing an NP program within the country with adequate resources and consistent with the EMR strategy for strengthening nursing and midwifery services (J. Al-Khadhuri, Director General for Nursing, Ministry of Health, Oman, per- sonal communication, April 27, 2020).

Europe: WHO-EURO
fte WHO Regional Office in Copenhagen, Denmark, serves the WHO European Region, which comprises 53 countries covering a vast geographical region from the Atlantic to the Pacific Oceans. fte European Union (EU) within this WHO region is composed of 27 mem- ber states. fte APN roles bear the historical and soci- etal characteristics of each country. In January 2020, BREXIT (British exit from the European Union) be- came a reality. For the purposes of this chapter, APN development in the United Kingdom (UK) will be in- cluded with the other countries of Europe and as listed under the WHO designation. Note also that although Israel is geographically located in the Middle East, it is included in the EURO region.
  
fte European countries are at different stages in ex- ploring or developing APN roles. Initial development in Europe began in 1991 when the first NP educational pro- gram was introduced in the Royal College of Nurses in the UK (Sheer & Wong, 2008), thus catalyzing develop- ment in the UK. In Ireland, the first “advanced NP” was accredited in 1996, and a career pathway toward APN was established following a Commission on Nursing in the late 1990s (National Council for the Professional De- velopment of Nursing and Midwifery [NCNM], 2005). fte Netherlands has a nearly 20-year history with the Dutch version of NP. Other countries’ initiatives are in the early stages with dramatic growth shown within the past 5 to 10 years. fte following section describes the diversity of APN development in Europe.
The European Federation of Nurses (EFN) and Advanced Practice Nursing in Europe
fte EFN is the independent voice of more than three million nurses in more than 34 national nurses associa- tions (NNA), regulators, or unions at the European level. In 2011, the EFN began to actively support APN fol- lowing Directive 2005/36/EC that highlighted the need to update and modernize education requirements for nursing in Europe. fte result was the strengthening of nurse education requirements and practice standards and the addition of eight competencies. fte EFN was very much involved in the clarification of those competencies, which were presented to the Parliament, council, com- mission, and stakeholders during a European Parliament roundtable on nurse education in October 2012. Now that Directive 2013/55/EU has been approved, the EFN plans to ensure that appropriate changes occur in every member state for three categories of nursing: general care nurse (RN), specialist nurse (SN), and advanced NP.
Belgium
Belgium is comprised of three regions: Flanders (Dutch-speaking), Wallonia (French-speaking), and the metropolitan area of Brussels (both French and Dutch-speaking). Health-care regulation is both federal (e.g., legislation on health-care professionals and hospi- tals) and regional (e.g., legislation regarding education of health-care professionals and nursing homes). ftis com- plex regulatory situation results in a multifaceted and slow introduction of innovations in health care.



  In Flanders, the implementation of academic mas- ter’s programs for nurses and midwives in the 1980s led to the unofficial start of APN positions. Since then, several advisory reports recommended the elaboration of APNs within the Belgian health-care system (Fed- eraal Kenniscentrum voor de gezondheidszorg KCE, 2012; Van Hecke et al., 2019; Zorgnet Vlaanderen, 2011). In the meantime, the number of APNs in- creased in 2020 to about 70 but lacked a correspond- ing legal framework justifying these positions. fte APNs are mainly working in Flemish university hospi- tals and mostly as CNSs. In some cases, blended roles integrating aspects of NPs and CNSs are observed (Sermeus et al., 2018).
What has emerged in the last 5 years is a sense of
readiness for APN implementation and a clear cul- tural change in nursing. In 2016, the MOH developed new health-care concepts such as considering every health-care professional an autonomous professional, including nurses. For years, the use of a pyramidal structure to position health-care professionals was com- mon. Physicians were situated at the top and nurses somewhere at the bottom of the pyramid. Indeed, 50 years ago, nurses had to execute the physicians’ orders. Since then, nurses have evolved to critical-thinking pro- fessionals; however, legislation has not evolved at the same pace.
In 2016, the Belgian Association of APN (Bel-
gische Vereniging van Verpleegkundig Specialisten [BVVS]) was established. However, as of June 2020, only Flemish-speaking APNs were members because in Wallonia and Brussels the APN function had not been introduced yet. In 2017, the Federal Council of Nurses launched its clinical model of nursing roles, providing nurses career advancement in direct pa- tient care. ftis model consists of three clinical career steps: registered nurses, specialized nurses, and APN. In 2018, a 2-day colloquium was held by Flemish universities in collaboration with the MOH. In their report, they made recommendations for APN imple- mentation in Belgium, shown in Box 5.4 (Sermeus et al., 2018).
In 2019, APN title protection was outlined in the
Belgian legislation (Law of 22 April 2019). fte term APN was translated as “Verpleegkundig Specialist” in Flemish and “Infirmier de Pratique Avancée” in French.



Recommendations for APN Implementation
     in Belgium
1. Determining competences and authorizations (cf. Hamric, CanMeds roles)
2. Establishing training conditions at least at an academic master's level
3. Determining	minimal	work	experience requirements
4. Validation and registration as APN
5. Establishing working conditions and scope of practice
6. Ensuring that the nursing role remains the fo- cus even with medical task shifting
7. Warranting that the core duty remains direct patient care
8. Creating an APN peer network with support of nurse managers and also making the APN function clear to stakeholdersAdapted from Sermeus, W., Eeckloo, K., Van der Auwera, C., & Van Hecke, A. (2018). Future of nursing: Improving health, driving change: Lessen uit de internationale literatuur en studiedagen 2017. FOD Volksgezondheid, Veiligheid van de voedselketen en Leefmilieu, 26b.



In other paragraphs of the legislation, shown in Box 5.5, some vague descriptions are given. ftese descriptions will need to be elaborated by a council of nurses and physicians because the APN will autonomously practice clinical interventions now legally restricted to physicians. fte legal framework discusses only the impact of APNs on direct patient care. However, the impact on nurses, nursing practice, and organizations and systems is also important, especially for the APN in a CNS po- sition. Unfortunately, these topics are outside the legis- lation’s scope. fterefore, focus is solely on direct patient care and could unintentionally be misunderstood as a choice to implement APN positions with emphasis on physician substitution. However, the report explaining this new law refutes this misunderstanding and stresses the importance of broader APN roles such as organizing care (leadership), building competency in nursing, sup- porting interprofessional teams in their clinical domain,





Unofficial Translation of Belgian Legal Text
     Giving APNs Title Protection
1. No one is allowed to carry the title of “Ver- pleegkundig Specialist / Infirmier de Pratique Avancée” who does not possess the diploma of nurse as mentioned in article 45 and who does not meet the requirements specified in this ar- ticle. At least also a Master degree in Nursing Sciences will be required.
2. Additional to the scope of practice of nursing as mentioned in article 46, the “Verpleegkundig Specialist / Infirmier de Pratique Avancée” car- ries out, in the context of complex nursing care, medical interventions in order to maintain, im- prove or restore the health of the patient.
fte aforementioned care is carried out in the context of a specific target group of patients and in close consultation with the physician and potential other health-care professionals.
fte King of Belgium will decide through a Royal Decree after consulting the Council of Ministers, and based on the advice of the Technical Commission of Nursing and the High Council of Specialized Physicians and General Practitioners, which medical interven- tions the “Verpleegkundig Specialist / Infirmier de Pratique Avancée” is entitled to carry out. Based on this advice, the King can also decide under which conditions the “Verpleegkundig Specialist / Infirmier de Pratique Avancée” can carry out these interventions.
3. fte interventions mentioned in paragraph 2 are recorded in the nursing file.Adapted from Van Hecke, A., Bogaert, P., Decoene, E., Dobbels, F., Goossens, E., Goossens, G. A., Verhaeghe, S., & Goffin, T. (in press). A legal framework on advanced practice nursing in Belgium: What do we and don’t we know? Acta Clinica Belgica.

conducting evidence-based nursing research, and imple- menting innovative practices.
   fte legal framework is undoubtedly a major break- through with APN title protection. However, some

issues still have to be addressed; for example, how APNs distinguish themselves from other nursing functions, what complex nursing care entails, which medical in- terventions APNs can perform, what “specific target group of patients” and “in close consultation with the physician” means. As of June 2020, a governmental working group composed of nurses and physicians is discussing the concrete requirements related to educa- tion, recognition, and grandfather rules for the nurses currently working as APNs. Many concerns arise be- cause the group is multiprofessional and multiregional with different considerations, cultures, and languages. One example is the future of APN education. A master’s degree in nursing sciences is detailed in the law as an educational prerequisite. Several stakeholders are convinced that an academic master’s program in nursing science is essential to ensure that APNs bring clinical leadership and implement scientifically underpinned innovations to their practice. However, educational leg- islation in Belgium is not a federal but a regional regula- tion. ftree Flemish universities reshaped their master’s programs to introduce an academic master’s degree with an APN specialization added for the 2021–2022 aca- demic year. On the other hand, in Wallonia and Brus- sels, the educational regulation requires a combined APN degree awarded by both federal and regional en- tities simultaneously (university college and university). Potentially, Belgium may have two different educational requirements for APNs (G. A. Goossens and A. Van
Hecke, personal communication, June 22, 2020).
Finland
Historically in Finland the concept of APN has not been officially recognized even though there are nurses in PHC and hospital settings who work in roles that have advanced clinical components. In PHC settings, nurses, not necessarily APNs, are usually the first and, in many cases, the only point of contact for patients. In 2019, according to the Finnish Institute for Health and Wel- fare, patients made 4,624,944 physician appointments and 4,660,064 nurse appointments in primary health centers. Task allocations have been shifted from the phy- sicians to the nurses in order to ensure improved access to health-care services.
Advanced practice roles for nurses have been devel-
oped systematically in Finland since the early 2000s. fte first role associated with APN was that of the CNS.



Restricted authority to prescribe medicines was intro- duced to the country in 2010. In 2019, this authority was broadened. In addition to prescribing in primary care centers, APNs’ prescriptive authority was extended to specialized health-care settings and home care. In that same year, nearly half of the primary health centers (n = 132) had appointed one or more nurses with the restricted authority to prescribe; in total, 8% of nurses working at primary health centers had the authority to prescribe (Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, 2019). In 2020, the list of medicines for nurse pre- scribing was further expanded. Prescriptive authority is the only APN capability that is regulated in Finland (A. Suutaria, personal communication, May 15, 2020). A group of experts selected by the Finnish Nurses Association (FNA) in 2013 assessed the circumstances of APNs in Finland and recommended actions for de- velopment. With great excitement and anticipation, the report was made public in April 2016 (FNA, 2016). In addition to suggesting that the roles of CNS and NP be considered, the report described a clinical career path for
nurses in advanced roles. fte report recommended:
• Establishing coherent titles for the roles with defined job descriptions
• Making legislative changes relevant to advanced nurs-
ing roles
• Establishing appropriate education for nurses to ob- tain relevant competencies
• Developing wages that are consistent with role
responsibilities
• Defining a plan to evaluate the effectiveness of APN roles in the country
• Estimating the number of APNs needed in the
country
   Lobbying efforts continue as of 2020. Even though Finland recognizes the advanced roles of CNS and NP, the country does not have official nationwide titles or regulation for title protection. In most areas of Finland, it can be said that APN is in an early developmental phase (Jokiniemi, Suutaria, et al., 2020).
   ftree education paths could lead to APN roles in Finland:
1. Master’s degree from a university of applied sci- ences (UAS), 90 ECTS (European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System). fte candidate must

have a bachelor’s degree or equivalent and at least 2 years’ work experience before application. fte new curricula for clinical UAS master’s degree fol- low closely how NP practice is understood globally, even though the legislation does not recognize this clinical practice.
2. Master’s degree from university, 120 ECTS. Post-bachelor’s education is required. To be em- ployed as a CNS, a university master’s degree or doctorate is often required.
3. Education to have the restricted authority to pre- scribe, 45 ECTS. ftis is not a degree. A candidate to receive prescriptive authority must be a regis- tered nurse with at least 5 years’ work experience, of which at least 3 years’ experience are from the setting in which the nurse will be prescribing. ftis role is regulated, and registration is required before the nurse can prescribe. Education includes man- datory clinical practice for advanced skills, but not a master’s degree, but the competencies are at the same EQF level 7 as a master’s degree. fte educa- tion for prescriptive authority is not included in ei- ther of the other degrees mentioned above; however, students can construct individualized programs to complete an educational track that includes pre- scriptive authority.
   As of May 2020, more than 100 nurses are working in CNS positions in various health-care settings. Most of the CNSs have taken their master’s education at a uni- versity with only a few completing their education at a UAS. A growing number have university doctoral-level education. However, Finland does not have specific CNS programs at universities or UASs. A network of CNSs has been created to share and unify work descriptions and required competencies. fte CNS competencies have been developed and validated for the Nordic context (Jokiniemi et al., 2018; Jokiniemi, Pietila, Mikkonen, 2020); however, their integration into education and clinical practice will take some time.
UASs have offered master’s-level clinical degree pro-
grams for approximately 10 years, but the programs vary quite a bit, and the competencies have not always been acknowledged in practice. It has been unclear as to how the competencies could be best utilized. Moreover, there is a lack of identified clinical positions for students when they exit these educational programs. A network



of advanced practice nursing educators was officially established in 2020 to support and promote an APN role similar to the NP. In 2020, a new joint curriculum was published for UAS advanced clinical practitioners (ACPs) including interdisciplinary education. ftis cur- riculum was developed by experts from 13 UASs. It is hoped that the curriculum will clarify ACP competencies and roles for educators, clinical practitioners, and stu- dents and thereby ease the transition to practice so that APNs reach their full potential in clinical practice. fte new core competencies are (1) research and service de- velopment; (2) patient education and staff development;
(3) professional leadership; and (4) clinical expertise and
direct clinical care. One legal obstacle is that based on the law as of 2020 regarding all master’s education at UASs, clinical practice is not part of the education (V. Sulosaari, personal communication, May 18, 2020).
   Clinical practice is, however, an essential part of the education of nurses who have limited authority to pre- scribe (45 ECTS post-bachelor education). With the UAS clinical master’s degree and subsequent prescriptive education (or vice versa), the nurse gains some prescrip- tive autonomy. fte education for nurses’ restricted au- thority to prescribe is not a master’s degree; but in 2020, it was officially set on the same European Qualification Framework (EQF) level 7 as the master’s-level degrees. In the future, education for prescribing and the UAS clinical master’s programs will likely be combined. With that combination, students could fulfill the international NP competency criteria (V. Sulosaari & A. Suutaria, per- sonal communication, May 18, 2020).
Since 2018, the FNA has once or twice a year hosted
a network meeting for APN educators, professionals working with advanced role education at universities or UASs. ftese meetings resulted from a need to share un- derstanding and the vision for the future. In the future, the plan is to also include APN representatives from clin- ical practice. fte Finnish Chief Nursing Officer from the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health has actively taken part in the network as well as an expert from the Ministry of Culture and Education. Now is the time for these professionals to promote the APN agenda. A pre- vious attempt to reform national social and health-care policies failed; thus, a new plan is under consideration. fte FNA envisions that nurses in advanced roles will bring great value to health-care services throughout the

country (K. Jokiniemi, V. Sulosaari, A. Suutaria, per- sonal communication, May 18, 2020).
France
In July 2018, the policies governing the practice of APNs were finally published in France (Décret no 2018-629 du 18 juillet 2018 relatif a l’exercice infirmier en pratique avancée, 2018). ftis date marks the culmination of a long negotiation process that began 15 years earlier.
   fte characteristics adopted in France to define APNs’ mission and scope of practice are similar to the profile of CNS as defined in the international standards proposed by the ICN Guidelines on Advanced Practice Nursing (2020). fte profile chosen as well as the length of the negotiations required for its adoption reflect the salient features of the French health-care system: conservatism and the predominance of the medical profession. Nurses, whether or not in advanced practice, remain a medical auxiliary in the Public Health Code. fte structure of the health professions is very old-fashioned, maintaining the absolute primacy of the medical profession.
Although the methodology used to design advanced
practice nursing has been presented by political decision makers as participatory and needs-focused, the profile chosen does not take into account certain health needs of the French population and ignores the inadequacies of the supply of health-care services, particularly with re- gard to first line health-care providers. If needs had been taken into account, it would have been clear that both NPs and CNSs are needed in the health-care system (C. Debout, personal communication, May 25, 2020).
   As in many countries, the demographic and epide- miological characteristics of the French population cou- pled with the inadequacy of health-care services have led policymakers to consider introducing advanced practice (Ministère des Solidarités et de la Santé, 2018). ftis inno- vation is part of a broader reform of health care, which in recent years has been undergoing a paradigm shift from a very hospital-centered system to a much more integrative model that is better suited to the expectations of the pop- ulation and the prevalence of chronic pathologies.
   In France, the nursing profession has been working since the mid-1990s to promote the advancement of clinical nursing and nursing expertise. Education pro- grams preparing certified clinical nurses and CNSs have been offered since this period, but these functions were



never officially recognized in the French health-care system (Debout, 2014). Simultaneously, physicians in charge of finding effective strategies to compensate for the insufficient supply of medical care have been attracted by the concept of task-shifting proposed by the WHO. ftese physicians see advanced practice as a means to save medical time by refocusing physicians’ practice on “noble” activities and complex clinical situa- tions (Berland, 2003).
   To address the growing medical deserts, French health authorities have launched numerous initiatives to test acceptability and feasibility of advanced practice in the French context. During these years, the situation of health-care continued to deteriorate, forcing health-care professionals to go beyond their scope of practice in order not to leave the French population in a state of disarray.
   In a law aimed to modernize the health-care system, an article passed in January 2016 finally introduced ad- vanced practice in France for all “medical auxiliaries” (LOI n° 2016-41 du 26 janvier 2016 de modernisation de notre système de santé, 2016). ftis article protects the title. It states that APNs need to work in a team practice supervised by a physician, and it gives the APN supervised access to prescriptive authority. To become an APN, a nurse needs to complete and confirm completion of a graduate program and assume responsibility for the decisions taken and the actions carried out. ftis highly sensitive topic coupled with the political changes that occurred in 2017 delayed drafting of the implementing legislation of the law passed in 2016. Finally, in July 2018, implementation policies were published (Décret no 2018-629 du 18 juillet 2018 relatif à l’exercice in- firmier en pratique avancée, 2018).
fte APN works as a member of a team in a collab-
orative practice approach and is certified in one of four specialties:
• Stabilized chronic diseases—with regard to a list of defined pathologies
• Oncology and hematology/oncology
• Chronic kidney disease, dialysis, kidney transplantation
• Psychiatry/Mental health (Arrêté du 18 juillet 2018
fixant la liste des pathologies chroniques stabilisées prévue à l’article R. 4301-2 du code de santé pub- lique, 2018)
  
fte major characteristics of the APN role are identi- fied as follows (Debout, 2018). fte APN has a broader and more in-depth field of expertise than the generalist nurse, both in the clinical field and in activities carried out within health-care teams. A national framework of activities and competencies has been validated and in- cludes six generic competencies designated in each of the four areas of certification. fte APN ensures com- prehensive care and the care pathway of patients whose follow-up has been entrusted to the APN by a physi- cian. fte physician makes the diagnosis and defines the therapeutic plan. If necessary, the APN can adapt a pre- scription and prescribe diagnostic tests, the list that is fixed by decree. An organizational protocol is drawn up to describe the collaborative practice between the physi- cian and the APN and signed by both of them (Arrêté du 18 juillet 2018 fixant les listes permettant l’exercice infirmier en pratique avancee en application de l’article R.4301-3 du code de sante publique, 2018).
Each university implementing an APN program de-
termines its admission criteria. It is not necessary for a nursing applicant to have clinical experience to apply for this course of study. fte program is distributed over four semesters: the first two constitute the common core topics, and the last two are decided according to the chosen field of certification (Arrêté du 12 août 2019 modifiant l’arrêté du 18 juillet 2018 relatif au régime des études en vue du diplôme d’Etat d’infirmier en pratique avancée, 2019; Debout, 2019). fte program combines theoretical and clinical time. Two clinical placements must be confirmed: the first one in the second semes- ter lasts 1 month, and the second in the fourth semester lasts 4 months. Although a program must comply with the national framework, each university is given consid- erable freedom to implement the curriculum. Although they have attended accredited universities and taken master’s-level classes, APN graduates in France do not re- ceive the national master’s degree. fte university grants a diploma and also awards the certification giving the individual the authority to practice as an APN.
From the moment the APN role was launched in the
fall of 2018, these graduate nursing programs were very attractive to both universities and nurses. However, im- plementation in clinical environments is still uncertain, particularly in the community (Debout & Hue, 2019). In addition, APN remuneration remains a stumbling



block, regardless of the practice setting. A dedicated pro- fessional union was created even before the first APNs graduated. ftis occurrence probably reflects the distinct nature of practice specific to this type of employment.
   fte implementation phase in France faces multi- ple challenges. Hospitals and community care teams are responsible for designing effective implementation strategies based on reorganization of care. APNs must not only develop a collaborative practice agreement with both physicians and nurse managers but also with nursing colleagues. And APNs must do this within the teams in which they will be working without benefit of a model.
   It will be essential for APNs to maintain a link with their professional nursing associations in order not to use the medical profession as their only reference group. An initial evaluation of the impact of the first APNs has been requested by the French National Assembly by the end of 2021. Future developments in this new field of nursing are already expected in view of population needs. New areas of certification are likely to be created soon in emergency care and armed forces’ health service (C. Debout, personal communication, May 25, 2020).
Germany
As with other countries in Europe, Germany is in the early stages of APN development. Larger university hospitals in Germany have increasingly begun imple- mentation of APN-like roles in the past 3 to 4 years. In addition, Frankfurt am Main hosted the Fifth ANP/ APN Congress for German-speaking countries in 2019. Delegates from Austria, Germany, and Switzerland rep- resented German-speaking countries with an additional presence from Belgium, Canada, Ireland, the Nether- lands, Norway/Finland, and the United States. How- ever, overall, Germany remains in the beginning phase of APN development.
One of the reasons for the slower pace of APN devel-
opment in Germany compared to other countries relates to the lack of self-governance for nursing because nurs- ing boards are still being established. As of June 2020, only 3 of Germany’s 16 states (Bundesländer) have in- stituted a nursing board. Inevitably, this affects APN de- velopment because legislative frameworks for APN are missing (Keinath & Lehwaldt, personal communication, June 3, 2020). Frameworks are required to formalize a

system for title protection and regulation (licensure) and to clearly define roles and educational standards for APN (Maier, 2017; Schober, 2016).
   fte title Pflegeexpertin APN, which means “Nursing Expert APN,” has been suggested for Germany (DBfK/ ÖGKV & SBK, 2013; Ullmann et al., 2011). As of June 2020, there was no consensus on the requirements for this level of nursing or the scope of practice and clinical responsibilities that go with this title. However, the let- ters “APN” indicate that nurses in these roles are likely to adhere to internationally accepted standards and core concepts (clinical focus, working with patients and/or their families, educated to the master’s level or above).
   Two commonly cited schemes that have been used to guide APN development and implementation in Ger- many are Hamric and Hanson’s Integrative Model of Ad- vanced Practice Nursing (Tracy & O’Grady, 2019) and the PEPPA-framework (Bryant-Lukosius & DiCenso, 2004). fte majority of APNs currently practicing in Germany consider themselves CNSs with their scope of practice combining direct patient care and indirect ser- vices to the employing organization and other nursing staff (Feuchtinger, 2016; Mendel & Feuchtinger, 2009; Tracy & Sendelbach, 2019).
  fte general nurse-training bill has been revised, and the law implemented in 2020 allows for more degree-qualified nurse graduates (DBfK, 2019), a provi- sion that will ideally open possibilities for clinical career development in nursing. More universities are offering APN programs at the master’s degree level, including the Universities of Applied Sciences in Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, and Frieburg. Program titles range from advanced nursing practice with a specific focus such as oncology or rehabilitation to simply nursing science or nursing at a master’s level. Not all programs specifically identify an APN focus, even if the majority of graduates will likely remain in the clinical setting or pursue a clin- ical career similar to APN. In addition, master’s degree programs related to community health nursing with an expanded scope of practice have received attention and funding (Karll-Gesellschaft, 2018). However, there are still very few graduate nurses working in direct patient care, even at the German university hospitals. fte rate of graduate nurses with at least 50% of academic clin- ical practice time in direct patient care was about 1% (Tannen et al., 2017).



   Historically, it was only possible to combine nursing education (in separate nursing schools) and a bache- lor’s degree (at universities) as pilot projects. In the pi- lot courses, students completed their nursing studies in 3 years and then attended a university for at least one ad- ditional year. fte new law establishes this combination as one combined course of study, but it is only available in some states. fte hope is that when this system is fully implemented, it will attract more experienced nurses to upgrade to a master’s degree and increase the number of APNs (M. ftra, personal communication, May 23, 2020).
In Germany, APN curricula vary greatly and differ
from those of countries with a longer history of APN that include physical examination, history taking, di- agnosing, and prescribing (Maier, 2017). fte view that faculty members should be embedded in APN practice (Pulcini, 2014) is challenging because there is little over- lap between the educational and clinical sectors. For ex- ample, clinical lecturer or lecturer-practitioner positions are generally nonexistent in Germany. Practice modules and clinical work experiences to develop APN skills and competencies are rare components of APN curricula.
   As a result of this deficiency, the Deutsches Netzw- erk APN & ANP g.e.V. supports curriculum devel- opment and planned an Expert Workshop in 2020 (Pommersberger, 2019). Such workshops are expected to assist in creating the necessary awareness and understand- ing of the elements required for APN programs, espe- cially in sessions that include international perspectives.
  fte APN concept has become an ongoing topic for professional discourse in Germany with an increase in networking, nursing events, and conferences devoted to APN. fte Deutsches Netzwerk APN & ANP g.e.V. offers nurses, institutions, and others with an interest in developing advanced nursing roles ongoing support. fte activities facilitated by the Netzwerk include peri- odic international congresses, expert workshops, and an ANP/APN publication. In addition, the Deutscher Berufsverband für Plegeberufe (DBfk e.V), the largest German nursing association, also founded a network for advanced/expanded nursing practice to further promote new roles in nursing (M. ftra, personal communica- tion, May 23, 2020). In addition, fte German Nurse Management Association (Bundesverband Pflegemange- ment), the Association of Directors of Nursing, and the

Catholic Nurses Association also recognized the need for APNs in their jointly published brochure related to de- veloping excellence in nursing (Bundesverband Pflege- mangement, Katholischer Plegeverband, VPU, 2019).
   A research project related to APN in Germany is ti- tled “Hand in Hand.” Its focus is on the implementation of a primary care APN center in one of Germany’s rural areas (Gemeinsamer Bundesausschuss, 2020). fte proj- ect examines the expansion of nurses’ scope of practice and the collaborative work between general practitioners and APNs to enhance the management of rural patients with chronic diseases. Projects like this are a testament to ongoing APN developments in Germany and provide one example of how APN may be utilized in the future. fte number of “Pflegeexperten APN” is slowly but steadily rising. Mutual support and engagement at var- ious levels in health policy, education, and practice is taking place. With the drive toward more academically qualified nurses, with further debate at local and inter- national levels, and with more role models in practice, the implementation of APN is likely to become more widespread in the country. However, work remains including development of APN regulation, title pro- tection, specific curricula based on standardized edu- cational requirements, and focused advanced nursing competencies. All of these are needed to establish APN in Germany (Keinath & Lehwaldt, personal communi-
cation, June 3, 2020).
Ireland
APN roles were established in Ireland in 2001. fte first specialty was in emergency nursing in St. James’s Hos- pital, Dublin. Since then, advanced practice roles in nursing and midwifery have expanded with more than 50 specialties. Scope of practice includes legislated au- thority to prescribe medicinal products and episodes of ionizing radiation. April 2020 statistics show that there were 452 registered advanced nurse practitioners/ registered advanced midwife practitioners (RANP/ RAMP) on the live register in Ireland (K. Brennan, per- sonal communication, May 24, 2020).
   Advanced practice roles in Ireland evolved following the Report of the Commission on Nursing in 1998. ftis document acknowledged the need to provide a career pathway for nurses and midwives who wanted to re- main in clinical practice and progress from entry level to



clinical specialization linked to advanced practice. As a consequence of this report, the NCNM was established (NCNM, 2008) and provided systematic guidance for the development of advanced practice posts in Ireland. fte commission conceived of APN roles dispersed across the various areas of nursing, such as psychiatric services, intellectual disability nursing, elder care, and commu- nity public health, with the aim of enhancing services. Following the dissolution of the NCNM in 2010, its functions were transferred to the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Ireland (NMBI); this change made the group’s actions statutory.
fte NMBI is the statutory regulatory body for
nursing and midwifery in Ireland and has legislative authority to regulate APN and midwifery. fte Nurses and Midwives Act of 2011 provided for a distinct di- vision for registered advanced nurse/midwife practi- tioners. In accordance with the Nurses and Midwives Act of 2011, in 2017 the NMBI published updated “Standards and Requirements for Advanced Practice Nursing and Midwifery.” Building on the competen- cies required for nurse registration, the standards and requirements specify the competencies needed to reg- ister as an advanced nurse/midwife practitioner, fa- cilitating a career pathway for nurses who commit to the challenges and opportunities of achieving higher levels of capability. ftese competencies are divided into six domains: professional values and conduct, clinical decision making, knowledge/cognitive skills, communication/interpersonal, management/team, and leadership/professional scholarship. fte title “Advanced Nurse/Midwife Practitioner” is protected in legisla- tion, enhancing role clarity in Ireland (K. Brennan &
M. Duignan, personal communication, May 2020).
   A master’s degree (or higher) is required along with evidence of experience and preparation in a specialist area of practice. ftere must be clear evidence that the person applying for registration as either an ANP or AMP has the expertise, advanced knowledge and clinical skills, advanced clinical decision-making capabilities, leader- ship skills, research skills, and clinical wisdom to fulfill an advanced practice role. In addition, this document outlines the standards and requirements for the approval of higher education institutions, associated health-care providers, and education programs that lead to registra- tion as an advanced nurse/midwife practitioner (http:// www.nmbi.ie/).
  
In the decades since the commission’s report, the number of nurses and midwives working in advanced practice roles has remained low by international stan- dards. Moreover, rather than the geographic and special- ist distribution of APNs envisioned by the commission, advanced practice posts have developed largely in an ad hoc fashion in response to local need with a bias toward medical, surgical, and emergency nursing (Department of Health, 2017). fte challenge of role integration led the Department of Health to publish A Policy on the Development of Graduate to Advanced Nursing and Mid- wifery Practice in order to streamline the process by which a nurse or midwife can practice at an advanced level (Department of Health, 2019). ftis policy aims to maximize the nursing and midwifery response to cur- rent and emerging health service challenges and to create a critical mass of nurses and midwives working in ad- vanced practice roles. fte Irish Department of Health aims to increase the number of nurses and midwives working in advanced practice roles to 750 by 2021 (De- partment of Health, 2019).
Research studies in Ireland indicate that APNs are lead-
ing and developing services across a diverse range of roles (Begley et al., 2010; O’Connor et al., 2018); however, there are indications that APNs in Ireland are not working to the top of their education and capability, constrained by organizational factors (Kerr & Macaskill, 2020). Contri- butions to the APN literature from Ireland provide some understanding of the situation in the country. In addi- tion, publications increase the visibility of the breadth and depth of advanced practice roles in Ireland (Duignan & Duignan, 2017; Higgins et al., 2018; McBrien, 2018; O’Keeffe et al., 2020; O’Connor et al., 2018).
   fte Irish Association of Advanced Nurse and Midwife Practitioners (IAANMP), established in 2004, provides a forum to support persons interested in promotion and development of advanced nurse practitioners and ad- vanced midwife practitioners in Ireland. fte association supports nurses and midwives practicing at advanced levels, provides a forum to debate issues and concerns, promotes professional development, and links to other international organizations (http://www.iaanmp.ie).
Israel
As of July 2016, there was no nurse practice act (NPA) in Israel. All nurses practice under a clause of the Physi- cian Practice Act passed during the establishment of the



state in 1947 and revised in 1976. fterefore, the scope of nursing practice is not specifically defined by law but by executive order of the MOH and by institutional pol- icies. fte Division of Nursing within the MOH regis- ters nurses who have successfully completed a course of study and have passed a qualifying examination. ftere are registries for licensed practical nurses (LPNs), RNs, post-basic nursing certification, and APNs (Ministry of Health, 2016b).
  fte introduction of APN occurred in 2009 by an ex- ecutive order identifying the role of nurse specialist in palliative care (Ministry of Health, 2009). Requirements for the role are a baccalaureate and a master’s degree, at least one of which is in nursing, post-basic certification in oncology or geriatrics, an advanced palliative care course, and successful completion of a theoretical and clinical examination. ftirty-five nurses with experience in palliative care and post-basic certification were ini- tially grandfathered in as specialists (Ministry of Health, 2016a).
   fte role of geriatric nurse specialist was introduced in 2011. Two years later, the MOH published an exec- utive order standardizing the specialist role within the health-care system (2013) that not only defines the re- quirements for the role but also provides the scope of practice. Since 2013, additional specialist roles have been introduced and other specialties are in the plan- ning phases (Ministry of Health, 2016a). As of July 2017, one geriatric specialist course was available that has graduated 19 nurses who are registered as geriatric nurse specialists.
  fte changes in Israel are positive and dynamic; however, qualified nurse specialists continue to work as staff nurses and not to the full extent of their scope of practice. In addition, education is usually not provided within an academic structure. In spite of this and the shortage of nurses in the country, development of the advanced practice role is progressing (F. DeKeyser Ganz, personal communication, May 4, 2016).
Lithuania
In 2013, the Lithuanian University of Health Sciences (LUHS) in Kaunas partnered with a U.S. university to introduce the NP role. In 2014, the Health Care Min- ister of the Republic of Lithuania appointed a special workgroup to review the feasibility of developing an APN program. Findings from the study conducted by

the workgroup indicated: (a) higher education was ca- pable of preparing NPs for higher qualification, but the law did not allow implementing wider competencies in practice; (b) the rapidly developing health-care system could not react resourcefully to changing patient needs because of the long preparation for physicians; (c) the shortage of nursing specialists affected access to health care and increased inequalities between urban and rural areas; (d) the need for nursing services in the home was not being satisfied. fte Health Care Minister and MOH approved the concept of APN and confirmed the APN role as part of the direction of nursing through 2025.
fte LUHS is an academic health center with a med-
ical school and hospital, so resources for some advanced nursing courses were already established. LUHS faculty used American guidelines to develop a 2-year, 4-semester, full-time NP curriculum with consultation from their partner university. During 2015, the LUHS University Senate approved the APN program with accreditation through the Ministry of Education and Research. fte first cohort of 13 students enrolled in September in pri- mary care, emergency care, or anesthesia and intensive care specialties. Clinical rotations began in 2016 with physician preceptors. In 2017, the MOH approved leg- islation for APN competencies and functions. fte first students graduated in June 2017. Within 3 years, enroll- ment in the program had nearly doubled.
A candidate for the APN program in Lithuania must
have achieved a Bachelor of Science in Nursing. A mas- ter of science degree is awarded upon successful comple- tion of the program.
   Because there are no NP role models in Lithuania, lack of knowledge about APN and the NP role plus lack of acceptance from stakeholders created challenges. However, the LUHS continued to address the legal issues of title protection, licensure, regulation, certification and credentialing, scope of practice, and compensation. Efforts were directed toward legislative and regulatory issues while also refining the APN curriculum to best educate and evaluate student competencies.
   Advanced nursing practice has continued to move forward step by step. As of April 2020, there are a total of 53 APNs in Lithuania. fte Kaunas Clinics of fte Hospital of LUHS have established a limited number of NP positions. fte first employment position that met the criteria of APN regulations was assigned in the family medicine clinic. Two NPs are working in the



clinic, independently managing patients with multi- ple comorbidities. In 2019, one NP with an anesthesia and intensive care specialization started to work in the cardio-surgery clinic; she provides care to patients after surgery, also practicing independently. A position has also been developed for an APN nurse in the munici- pality hospital.
   fte establishment of these APN positions and the ability of the NPs to practice independently indicate that stakeholders and society better understand and recognize the APN role and function in the Lithuanian health-care system. fte fact that NPs now have privi- leges (since 2019) to prescribe certain medications from a list approved by the MOH supports the continuation of educating APN nurses and integrating them into the health-care system. Although APN nurses represent a small community in Lithuania, they are very active and enthusiastic about their practice, which they expect will improve the quality of care and positively impact patient outcomes. In 2019, they established a professional orga- nization for APN nurses and organized the first nursing forum dedicated to the WHO’s 2020 Year of the Nurse and Midwife. fte future of APN in Lithuania shows promise for continued advancement (A. Blazeviciene and J. A. Newland, personal communication, April 22, 2020).

Netherlands
In the Netherlands, the Dutch title for the advanced nursing role is nurse specialist (NS) and practitioners have the title NP NS. fte concept of NP caught the attention of decision makers in the country nearly 20 years ago, but the words nurse practitioner could not be translated into the Dutch language. Since 1997 when the idea was introduced, there have been great strides in development in the country supported by the Dutch government, the Dutch Hospital Association, the Dutch Association of Health Insurance Companies, as well as the Dutch Society of Physicians.
   In 2004, grants and supportive salaries were made available by the government for those nurses wanting to undertake advanced study. ftis plan was organized in collaboration with health-care institutions that took on the role of employer during the time the nurse was an NS student. In 2009, legislation was developed to

guarantee the quality of education and work for the NS. fte professional regulations provided title protection and stipulated standards for education, registration, and practice. In 2011, additional legislation expanded the authority for scope of practice for the NS closely linked to the practice specialty chosen by the NS.
   As of May 2020, approximately 4,055 NSs have been educated and registered in the country. Ten universities of applied sciences in the Netherlands offer an NS edu- cation program. In close collaboration, the universities have developed a competency-based program intended to be consistent across all universities in the Netherlands. fte Dutch NP works as an independent practitioner, offering care that combines nursing principles with skills associated with medical treatment. In contrast to phy- sicians and physician assistants, who work mainly from the biomedical perspective, the Dutch NP works from the nursing perspective, that is, primarily focused on hu- man functioning as well as psychosocial well-being. ftey combine this with biomedical clinical reasoning. ftis means that the NP independently takes a medical his- tory and intake; collects information in a goal-oriented manner; conducts an independent physical examination; formulates a differential diagnosis; requests additional consultation when needed; and initiates and/or per- forms diagnostic, therapeutic, and preventive interven- tions while also monitoring and managing progress of
the person.
   To allow them to work independently, NPs are en- titled to independently select, implement, and delegate the following medical reserved procedures: (1) surger- ies; (2) endoscopies; (3) catheterizations; (4) injections;
(5) punctures; (6) elective cardioversion; (7) defibrilla- tion; and (8) prescription of prescriptive drugs. In 2012, NPs gained independent practice authority on an experi- mental basis. In 2018, this practice became officially legal. fte role of the Dutch NP extends beyond delegation and tasks complementary to medicine; in fact, about 40% to 50% of their work is considered additional au- tonomous health-care services. Because they integrate nursing with biomedical skills, they are able to bridge both domains and cover more primary human needs (Dusseldorp et al., 2018, 2020). NPs work with other health-care professionals as equal and independent practitioners. ftey carefully and effectively coordinate management plans with other health-care professionals,



develop clear agreements about the patient groups seen by the NP within the designated competency area, and perform the need assessment and delegation of reserved procedures in patient groups. When necessary, they call on other professionals for consultation and provide con- sultations based on their own expertise while ensuring the quality and continuity of treatment. fte NP is the link connecting medical specialties, settings, and disci- plines in health-care services (Dusseldorp et al., 2018, 2020; Kappert & de Hoop, 2019).
   In 2015, Dutch NPs became authorized to invoice fees and authorize diagnosis-treatment combination health-care products. Since January 2019, they can also independently invoice peer consultation and co-treatment fees and also in- voice activities under the Chronic Care Act. NPs have been coordinating practitioners in mental health since 2017. Evaluations of patient safety and practitioner efficiency and effectiveness have been positive (Bruijn, de Geraets et al., 2015, 2016).
   fte shortage of physicians that prompted the intro- duction of the NS role in the Netherlands has been re- solved, but the number of NSs continues to increase. At one point, it was thought that the introduction of phy- sician assistants (PAs) would threaten NS development, but this has not been the case. fte NS in the Nether- lands has been accepted as a professional who provides high-quality care and friendly advice (J. Peters, personal communication, May 24, 2020).
Sweden
Sweden introduced the concept of advanced nursing roles as a strategy to improve access to PHC, especially care of the elderly in the community. Educational pro- grams have been established with these clinical foci in mind. fte title used in Sweden is advanced clinical nurse specialist (ACNS) (Lindblad et al., 2010). fte APN con- cept continues to evolve as a blended role (CNS and NP) compared to other countries with APN educational foundation at the master’s level (Bergstrom & Lindh, 2018).
   In Skaraborg, PHC authorities worked with the Uni- versity of Skovde to develop a model and educational program that met the requirements of the National Board of Health and Welfare. fte primary consideration was PHC for the community and care of the elderly with the ACNS as the vehicle to address these needs.

fte initial cohort of students who enrolled in 2003 faced challenges introducing a new nursing role that fit the Swedish health-care system and was acceptable to all stakeholders. In the process, a definition for the APN was negotiated (Schober & Affara, 2006, p. 6):
An Advanced Nurse Practitioner in Primary Health Care is a registered nurse with special education as a district nurse with the right to prescribe certain drugs, and with a post graduate education that enables [the advanced nurse practitioner] an increased and deepened competence to be independently re- sponsible for medical decisions, prescribing of drugs and treat- ment of health problems within a certain area of health care.
   As of 2020, APN educational programs at the Uni- versity of Skovde are offering preparation for “nurse practitioner” roles in the specialties of adult/gerontology primary care, adult/gerontology acute care, psychiatry/ mental health, and family nurse practitioner. Researchers investigating students’ motives for studying at an ad- vanced nursing level recommended continued support for expanded APN in Sweden (Bergstrom & Lindh, 2018).
   Prescriptive authority for nurses in Sweden has been in place since 1994, well before the consideration and development of APN. Literature reveals that although there is interest in the idea of advanced nursing, demarca- tion of the role relative to physicians and appropriate in- tegration of APN into the health-care workforce remains unclear (Jangland et al., 2014; Lindblad et al., 2010). In comparing how students perceive the APN role based on practical and theoretical knowledge, Bergstrom and Lindh (2018) concluded that increased attention needs to be paid to developing APN role models in the current Swedish health-care system.

Switzerland
Advanced nursing practice was introduced in 2000 in Switzerland with the first master of science in nursing program at the Institute of Nursing Science (INS) at the University of Basel. A shift to master’s-level pre- pared nurses in clinical specialist roles and development of master’s degrees at other academic institutions since 2004 has further encouraged the introduction of APN roles in a variety of clinical settings. In addition, the University of Basel, as of June 2020, introduced the Ad- vanced Nursing Practice-plus (ANP-plus) Diploma of



Advanced Studies. Nurses who are already an APN and have a master’s degree in nursing qualify for this course. fte course focuses on the treatment and care of older pa- tients and those with multi-morbidity and chronic dis- eases with the intent to deepen the knowledge and skills of nurses who work as an APN in primary or secondary care (University of Basel, personal communication, June 2020).
   A Swiss definition for APN was announced in 2012. fte definition was the result of a collaborative effort by the Swiss Nursing Association, the Swiss Association for Nursing Science, Swiss ANP, and the University Insti- tute for Nursing Education and Research in Lausanne. Research on APN in Switzerland has been conducted (Kambli et al., 2015; Müller-Staub et al., 2015; Ser- ena et al., 2015) and a framework for role evaluation has been developed (Bryant-Lukosios et al., 2016). In spite of this progress, as of June 2020, APN roles are not yet legally protected or formally credentialed. Legis- lation to regulate health-care professions at the bachelor’s and master’s levels for the entire country is in progress. ftere is interest to develop a legal framework for APN (C. Heering, personal communication, June 2020).
fte INS at the University of Basel has had a leading
role in promoting APN education and role development in the German-speaking world, not only for Switzerland but also for other German-speaking countries. From French-speaking Switzerland, there is development in Lausanne for APN at the University of Lausanne (http:// www.unil.ch/central/en/home.html). fte Master of Science (MSc) in Advanced Nursing Practice prepares students to work as an APN in one of four specialties: mental health, adult care, pediatric care, or primary care. fte University of Lausanne and the University of Ap- plied Sciences of Western Switzerland offer a joint Mas- ter of Science in Nursing (http://www.hes-so.ch).
United Kingdom (UK)
Advanced practice nursing (APN) is developing differ- ently in the four countries of the UK (England, North- ern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales). It is important to recognize that although the UK has a central govern- ment with overall authority, each country in the UK has a devolved government with separate authorities for de- veloping their own countrywide policies, including poli- cies for health care. ftis has led each country to develop

individual responses to APN development (Rogers & Gloster, 2020).
  fte concept of APN commenced initially in the UK with the CNS role in the 1970s followed by the NP role in 1988. fte advent of the NP was officially announced in 1994 by the United Kingdom Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting. fte emergence of the NP movement in the UK can be described as a response to changing health-care needs and acknowledg- ment that the traditional medical model alone was no longer sufficient to provide comprehensive health care for the changing needs of the population. A reduction in junior doctors’ working hours, an overall shortage of general practitioners in some areas, and a desire to ad- vance nursing accelerated the move toward the develop- ment of APN roles, especially the NP (McGee, 2019; Rogers & Gloster, 2020).
fte initial NP degree program, developed by the
Royal College of Nursing (RCN) in 1990, formed the basis for the original RCN accreditation of NP programs. In 2002, the first graduates from the RCN program cel- ebrated their 10th anniversary. fte initial 15 graduates paved the way for NPs now practicing throughout the UK (RCN, 2008). Different pathways of NP prepara- tion still exist with a growing tendency to require an ac- ademic preparation of a master’s-level degree (McGee, 2019).
   In November 2001, a decade after the first RCN NP course had begun, the inaugural meeting of the UK National Organization of Nurse Practitioner Faculties (NONPF) took place. Membership slowly increased and led to the establishment of a formal link with the national RCN Nurse Practitioner Association. In 2005, UK NONPF changed its name to the Association of Ad- vanced Nursing Practice Educators (AANPE) and was formally re-launched as a new independent association. fte AANPE participated in professional, regional, and country-specific advanced practice discussions, consulta- tions, and policy development across the UK. In 2015, the association renamed itself as the Association of Ad- vanced Practice Educators (AAPE UK) to reflect the growth and maturity of advanced practice in a broad, multiprofessional context in the UK. fte category of the advanced nurse practitioner became subsumed under the broader category of all nonmedical advanced practi- tioners providing health-care services.



   Despite all the energy, dynamics, and growth in the UK, regulation and title protection of ANP or the NP was never established. fte term advanced nurse practi- tioner was adopted by many NPs, but with a move to the broader context of multiprofessional advanced practice in health care, advanced clinical practitioner is currently the preferred term. However, the title is not protected, and there is no additional regulation for advanced prac- tice roles or for advanced levels of clinical practice. As a result, advanced practitioner may be included in some job titles, but this is not a guarantee that the individual has completed the expected master’s degree preparation or has the qualifications to provide care at this level of clinical practice (McGee & Inman, 2019).

Southeast Asia: WHO-SEAR
fte WHO South-East Asian Region (SEAR) has 11 member states: Bangladesh, Bhutan, Democratic Peo- ple’s Republic of Korea, India, Indonesia, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka, ftailand, and Timor-Leste. ftis section provides examples of APN development in the region.
India
Nurses are the most numerous health-care providers in India; however, the NP role has not been formally rec- ognized, and no national statistics are available on the actual APN presence. Initiatives are in process by the Indian Nursing Council (INC) to implement education programs to develop an NP role (INC, 2016; Prashanth, 2017; Sharma, 2015). However, prior attempts were constrained by financial and infrastructure limitations. Efforts to offer education to enable nurses to take on ad- vanced roles at private institutions, although not widely adopted, have been successful.
  fte Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) and INC are supportive of the independent nursing or NP role in India (Prashanth, 2017). fte INC has created a curriculum for a critical care NP role. It is intended that the Critical Care Nurse Practitioner Pro- gram will prepare nurses to provide a higher level of care to critically ill patients and minimize complications in order to enhance full recovery (INC, 2016). Comple- tion of this program requires an MSc degree for criti- cal care NP. fte concept of a primary care NP is also

being explored. Nurses in India do not have prescriptive authority.
  fte Nursing Practice Act, written in 1947, does not have provision for the APN or NP title. No legislation is currently being proposed that would create a defined advanced or independent nursing role. fterefore, APN regulation does not exist. In spite of this limitation, the proposed critical care NP by the INC would prepare graduate nurses to work independently and collabora- tively with institutional protocols. fte INC curriculum uses competency-based education that emphasizes clini- cal (85%) over didactic (15%) coursework (INC, 2016). It is noteworthy that as of September 2019, the INC instituted single-entry level for general nurses as a BScN with diploma programs (GMN) phased out by the 2020–2021 academic year. ftis is a positive indication of continued advancement for nursing in the country (INC, 2016).
Indonesia
fte Indonesian government and nursing associations have made efforts to enhance the professionalism of nursing through improvements of a higher degree of nursing education. Since 1985, nursing in Indonesia has moved from vocational to professional status through the opening of the first baccalaureate degree in the Uni- versity of Indonesia (UI). In 1994, another baccalaureate program in nursing was opened at Universitas Padjad- jaran (UNPAD) in West Java Province. Following the opening of baccalaureate programs, the UI opened the master of nursing programs that were integrated with specialization programs in 2003. ftese specialization programs consist of community nursing, maternity nursing, medical-surgical nursing, psychiatric nursing, and pediatric nursing (Simamora, 2009). In Indonesia, a master’s of nursing and nursing specialization programs are dissimilar. fte master’s degree focuses on academics and research; whereas, specialization programs focus on practice. fte Universitas Padjadjaran established mas- ter’s of nursing degrees in critical care and community health nursing in 2009, followed by master’s programs in medical-surgical nursing, nursing management, psy- chiatric nursing, and pediatric nursing. In 2020, three universities in the country offered both master’s and spe- cialization programs. Additional universities are prepar- ing to offer the specialization program.



   Indonesian nurses are entitled to open private nurs- ing practices, supported by regulations of the MOH since 2010. Moreover, in 2014 Indonesia passed a nurs- ing act that strongly supports private nursing practice. With advanced nursing education programs, the Indo- nesian government expects the improvement of nursing practice; however, the development of APN in Indonesia is relatively slow. One of the models for advanced nurs- ing practice in Indonesia is a nursing center (NC) model that was established in West Java, Indonesia.
  fte NC model in West Java is defined as a nurse- led clinic that integrates health-care services, education, and research through the optimal usage of all potential resources in the community health-care system (Samba, 2007). fte NCs place an emphasis on improving the quality of community health nursing (CHN) services as well as education and health outcomes for people in the community (Juniarti et al., 2018). fte conceptual framework of the Indonesian NC (Fig. 5.1) shows a triangle of CHN services, education, and research that surrounds a core of client-centered care at its core. CHN services and education are at the bottom of the trian- gle as fundamental activities that support research and community service activities, which form the top of the

triangle. CHN services occur both inside the NC facil- ity as well as outside through outreach activities. fte identification of health problems and community needs during the integration of CHN services and education becomes a topic of further research and community ser- vice activity (Juniarti et al., 2019).
Thailand
fte ftailand Nursing and Midwifery Council (TNMC) adopted the APN concept in 1998, and in 2003 the first group of 49 APNs was certified and awarded the title APN. fte TNMC defines the APN as an RN with a master’s degree who is qualified according to criteria set out by the TNMC. fte TNMC creates rules speci- fying which professional nursing organization certifica- tions can be accepted for APNs and sets requirements for education, training, and experience. Titles accepted as APN include certified nurse-midwife (CNM), cer- tified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA), CNS, and NP. APNs work in one of 10 specialist areas: medical/ surgical, pediatrics, maternal/child, community care, elderly care, psychiatric, NP, midwifery, infection con- trol, or anesthesia (P. Buaklee, personal communica- tion, June 20, 2016).







	

Figure 5.1 Conceptual Framework for the Nursing Centre (NC) in West Java, Indonesia



   In response to an urgent need for community health-care services, the country identified short- and long-term goals to offer 4-month education programs for general NPs to work in the community as primary care providers. Even though one of the first post-basic NP programs was established in the 1970s, it was health- care reform and the drive for a universal health-care coverage system, implemented in the country in 2002, that accelerated the development of NP educational pro- grams. To identify the strategic approach of NP educa- tion, Hanucharurnkul and colleagues (2007) conducted a study that explored characteristics and work settings of 1,928 NPs and provided a picture of those certified by the TNMC. Recommendations derived from this study are as follows:
• Extend within 5 years the entry-level education to a master’s level and acknowledge the 4-month programs that were originally initiated to respond to PHC needs of the country with credit for advanced standing.
• Establish NP positions in the health-care system such
that when APNs are master’s graduates and certified, they are eligible for the title of APN/MN and have an associated increase in salary.
   Results of a study on role development in ftailand conducted by Wongkpratoom and colleagues (2010) re- vealed that even though a certified APN role was func- tioning to some degree in the country, most APNs only occasionally served in an advanced practice capacity be- cause of various organization, human, and resource issues. Major facilitators include supportive organizational policies, quality nurse administrators, well-functioning multidisciplinary teams, and financial resources. Con- versely, study findings revealed that barriers included lack of a clearly delineated organizational structure and unclear organizational policies, poor administrative sup- port for the APN (work assignments were not reflective of advanced nursing practice), and uncooperative team members. Study findings confirm the complexities of role development and implementation when proceeding with the APN concept.
As of June 2020, there are two types of NP pro-
grams. fte master’s degree requires 42 credits to achieve APN accreditation and usually requires approximately 2 years of education. fte curriculum is concentrated on an advanced graduate certificate designed for APNs.

fte second type of NP program involves specializ- ing as an NP (primary medical care), which is a short course with 18 credits and a 4-month period of study (P. Buaklee, personal communication, June 20, 2016). To facilitate development, the ftai Bureau of Nursing recommended that the PEPPA framework developed by Canadian researchers Bryant-Lukosius and DiCenso (2004) be used as a guide for the introduction and eval- uation of APN roles in the country (Sathira-Angkura & Khwansatapornkoon, 2014).
   Preparation of APN at the master’s level in ftailand is problematic because the aim of graduate education ac- cording to the Commission of Higher Education (CHE) is to produce scholars to do research. ftus, the curricu- lum is heavy on research, both coursework and conduct- ing research, as well as publication of the findings. ftis results in increased number of credits and prolongs the time students stay in the program. However, these mas- ter’s graduates need to work in a clinical area an average of 3 years after graduation in order to pass the Certified Board Examination as an APN.
   In addition, there is a lack of nursing faculties who have competency in clinical practice. ftus, in 2014, the TNMC added a residency program similar to med- icine’s to train APNs. ftat is, those who earn a master’s degree in nursing are able to take the Certifying Board Examination if: (1) they enter into the 3-year program of post-master intensive clinical training with publica- tion of a project on quality improvement (similar to the Capstone Project in Doctor of Nursing Practice [DNP] programs in the United States); or (2) they have been working in a clinical area of specialty for 3 years and publish a paper on quality improvement. ftis Certified Board Specialty is accepted by the CHE as equivalent to a doctoral degree and is comparable to the DNP in the United States. It is hoped that this training pro- gram will strengthen the clinical competency of APNs to work in collaboration with other health-care pro- fessions in complex health-care systems. Furthermore, these APNs can be clinical faculty members, practicing and teaching both undergraduate and graduate students in a clinical area.
In ftailand, nurses are the cornerstone of primary
care. ftere are approximately 25,000 NPs with 4 months’ training. Most are working in primary care with respon- sibility in the promotion of health, prevention of disease,



diagnosis and treatment of common problems, man- agement of those with chronic illness/conditions, and end-of-life care both in specialty clinics and at home. fte TNMC required these NPs to continue with at least 30 hours of additional training in primary care within 5 years in order to renew their certificate as NPs. fte intent is to transfer their clinical experience to the master’s level if they want to pursue education in a master’s program. With their additional experience, they can take the Certifying Board Examination for the APN/NP (S. Hanucharurnkul, per- sonal communication, June 18, 2020).

Western Pacific: WHO-WPRO
fte WHO Western Pacific Region Office (WPRO) is lo- cated in Manila, Philippines, and represents 37 countries and areas in the Asia Pacific region. ftis region stretches from the People’s Republic of China in the north and west to New Zealand in the south to French Polynesia in the east. As one of the most diverse of the WHO regions, the WPR constitutes some of the world’s least developed countries as well as the most rapidly emerging econo- mies. It includes highly developed countries such as Aus- tralia, Japan, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, and Singapore as well as fast-growing economies such as the People’s Republic of China and Vietnam. ftis section of the chapter presents examples of the diversity of APN development in this region.
Australia
Australia first considered the development of NP roles in 1990 (Offredy, 1999). New South Wales (NSW) was the first state to implement the NP model of care with the first NP authorized to practice in 2000. Follow- ing the lead of NSW, most other states and territories of Australia followed. fte results from these initial projects found that NPs are feasible, safe, and effective in their ability to provide high-quality health-care services in a range of settings (Gardner & Gardner, 2005; Lowe & Plummer, 2019; NSW Health Department, 1998).
   fte NP in Australia is defined as “an advanced prac- tice nurse endorsed by the NMBA (Nursing and Mid- wifery Board of Australia) who has direct clinical contact and practices within their scope under the legislatively protected title ‘nurse practitioner’ under the National Law” (NMBA, 2018). Once an NP is endorsed, it is

expected that the NP understands and varies their scope of practice from that of an RN and realizes how these changes affect their responsibility and accountability in actual practice.
  fte NP title and role are protected by national legis- lation with the NMBA registration as an endorsed NP a requirement for practice. A master’s degree or its equiv- alent is required to achieve endorsement. In 2020, the NMBA defined two pathways for nurses to achieve en- dorsement as an NP:
1. Successful completion of an NMBA-approved NP program of study at the master’s level.
2. Completion of a program of study that is substan- tially equivalent to an NMBA-approved program of study leading to endorsement as an NP as de- termined by the NMBA. ftis option must be
(a) clinically relevant to the applicant’s context of APN for which they are seeking endorsement as an NP and (b) demonstrate evidence of master’s-level units in advanced health assessment, pharmacology and therapeutics, and research that meets the na- tional competency standards for an NP.
  In 2014, the NP competency standards were re- viewed and the following four standards for NP practice were implemented (NMBA, 2018):
• Assesses and uses diagnostic capabilities
• Plans care and engages others
• Prescribes and implements therapeutic interventions
• Evaluates outcomes and improves practice
   As of September 2018, there were 1,745 endorsed NPs in Australia, comprising a small but increasing component of the nursing workforce. fte NMBA rec- ognizes the concept of APN as a level of practice within a specific context, not a role. ftis perspective views APN as a continuum along which nurses develop professional knowledge and skills. Other than the NP role, there is no educational requirement stipulated for APN (Lowe & Plummer, 2019). ftere continues to be a poor under- standing of how many APNs work in Australia, what the different titles mean, what they do, and what their impact is (Gardner et al., 2017).
A study conducted in 2010 (Gardner et al., 2010)
found that two-thirds of NPs in Australia reported that their role was “extremely limited” because of a difference



between state and federal governmental laws. ftese re- sults were similar to those from an earlier survey under- taken in 2009 (Gardner et al., 2009). A further study by Gardner et al. (2017) explored practice patterns of the Australian nursing workforce according to practice pat- terns and titles. Even though the NP title is protected, there are numerous unprotected APN titles across Aus- tralia. In this context, advanced NPs remain under- valued. ftis finding demonstrates the need for greater clarity and consistency when defining NP practice.
   In Australia, NPs are steadily being introduced throughout the country while continuing to face country-specific challenges. Legislative barriers re- strict the full potential of practice. ftis in turn hinders the ability to enhance delivery of health-care services (Lowe & Plummer, 2019). fte Australian College of Nurse Practitioners (http://www.acnp.org.au/) has been established to provide a representative voice for NP role development in the country. In Australia, there is a need for policy change to enable full integration of NPs into the health-care workforce.
Brunei Darussalam
fte Nursing Services Department, Ministry of Health, Brunei Darussalam (MOH) has been exploring APN for the nurses in Brunei and for the health-care services in the country. To motivate nurses and provide a strategic action plan to the MOH, a workshop and symposium were held in July 2011 to gain an understanding of APN as an option for the future. A resolution and recommen- dations were presented to the MOH for development of a nursing career pathway for clinical practice along with organization of a task force to promulgate criteria, stan- dards, and regulations for APN. Debate has been focused around alignment of NP roles with nurse-midwives un- der the APN umbrella as well as clarification of where the specialist nurse fits in the future scheme for Brunei Darussalam.
fte MOH of Brunei, with the intent to implement
registration of nurses by the Nursing Board for Brunei (NBB) and heighten the monitoring of nursing practices in the country, announced the Nurses Registration Act (Amendment) 2014. fte amended Nurses Registration Regulations 2014 and Nurses Registration (Committee) Regulations 2014 were enforced in March 2014. fte MOH highlighted that the new amendments in the

act will protect the safety of nursing services and hoped that with the new nursing-service scheme, local nurses will reach the level of NP. As of May 2020, a master’s in nursing/advanced practice is listed as a career opportu- nity for nursing and is proposed as a component of the career nursing pathway in the country (accessed May 6, 2020 from http://moh.gov.bn).
Hong Kong, China
Hong Kong has been pursuing the development of APN for many years while facing complicated govern- mental, clinical, and academic challenges. fte Hospital Authority of Hong Kong, eager to improve efficiency and motivate nurses to remain in clinical practice, in- troduced the APN concept in 1990. In 1993, CNSs were introduced to provide specialty care; this was fol- lowed in 2000 by the establishment of nurse-led clinics to enhance continuity and accessibility of care. In order to further promote the concept of APNs, nurse consul- tants were announced in 2009 to provide health-care services for complex population needs and assume clin- ical leadership. As of 2014, a clear clinical pathway for nurses developing as a specialty with the APN title was available. Once a nurse has achieved APN status within the Hospital Authority System, the position of a nurse consultant is viewed as a role at the highest level of prac- tice along the clinical career pathway. Nurse consultants are similar to nurse specialists clinically but function at the highest level of practice, including responsibility to influence policy making to effect change (Wong & Wong, 2020).
Following formal and informal discussions com-
mencing in 2002, the Hong Kong Academy of Nursing (HKAN) was officially set up in 2012 to position ad- vanced nursing practice in Hong Kong on par with in- ternational standards. Generic APN competencies were formulated, and 14 specialty colleges were established under the auspices of HKAN. As of 2019, HKAN has established a system to accredit specialty colleges to en- dorse their specialty competencies, theoretical curricula, clinical logbooks, and examinations (Wong & Wong, 2020).
   APN education is at the postgraduate level with APNs managing 100 independent, nurse-led clinics in Hong Kong. The Hospital Authority Annual Report 2018–2019 indicated that there were 4,707 nurses at levels that



include ward manager, nurse specialist, nursing officer, advanced practice nurse, and nurse consultants. HKAN continues to strive for statutory status and title protec- tion for APNs in Hong Kong. As of 2019, the Hong Kong government is considering a statutory registration plan to grant legislative status to APNs through struc- tured education and a certification process (Wong & Wong, 2020).
Islands of the WPR (Fiji, Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, and Samoa)
NPs and other midlevel practitioners have provided health-care services for the populations of the Pacific Island countries for more than 20 years. fte rural and remote nature of this region and a shortage of physicians encouraged governments to explore the most appropriate models to provide comprehensive health-care services. Demographics help determine the best approach for the Pacific Islands in initiating education and practice guide- lines for NPs.
  fte seminal publication released from WPRO in 2001 identified reasons for educating nurses for NP roles in the Pacific Islands and includes the following (WHO-Western Pacific Region [WPRO], 2001):
• Nurses are already present in the workforce of most countries and usually comprise the largest category of health professionals.
• Nurses are currently living and working in under-
served areas.
• Nurses are providing a wide range of preventive and curative services.
• Nurses are considered to be an adaptable, multital-
ented resource of the workforce.
   Strategies recommended in this document for devel- oping and sustaining an APN workforce included the following (WHO-WPR, 2001):
• Legal protection
• Standard treatment guidelines
• Ongoing clinical supervision
• Continuing education
• Career structure or career ladder
   Advanced practice clinical services provided by nurses continue in diverse capacities among the Pacific Islands. ftis section presents examples of that diversity.

Fiji
Fiji is made up of more than 300 islands with more than 60% of the population living in rural or remote settings. ftrough an arrangement of health centers and nursing stations, authorities have attempted to address health- care challenges by providing preventive and PHC ser- vices supported by subdivisional and referral hospitals.
   Staffing of facilities has been a major problem, es- pecially in rural and remote areas. In response to this difficulty, an NP program was developed in 1988 and taught by staff within the then Fiji School of Nursing (FSN). In 2010, the school merged with the Fiji School of Medicine to form the College of Medicine, Nursing, and Health Sciences within the Fiji National University. fte NP program is now delivered as a two-semester, 13-month postgraduate diploma in nursing practice. fte program has a regional orientation, and students are ac- cepted from other islands in the Western Pacific Region. More recently, as of June 2020, the Sangam Col- lege of Nursing and Health Care Education within the Sangam Institute at Labasa, commenced an 18-month Postgraduate Diploma in Nurse Practitioner program. ftis program is also open to both domestic and regional applicants, who must possess current registration as a
generalist nurse in Fiji.
   In 2011, the Fiji government passed the Nursing De- cree 2011 that provided the legal framework for the es- tablishment of the new Fiji Nursing Council to take over responsibilities from the Nurses, Midwives, and Nurse Practitioner Board. Annual registration is now required by all NPs in Fiji as well as student nurses, midwives, reg- istered nurses, and specialist nurses. Evidence of annual engagement in relevant continuing professional develop- ment (CPD) activities is now expected.
   NPs in Fiji have an established scope of practice and work under published protocols, allowing them prescriptive privileges. fte MOH employs most NPs with postings for positions listed by the Public Service Commission. ftese nurses have been widely accepted by communities and other health-care providers. ftere is strong support from the directors of health services to continue the education program. Access to continuing education, an identified career pathway and opportuni- ties for site-specific relief are among the challenges fac- ing NPs in Fiji (D. Lindsay, personal communication, June 8, 2020).



Guam
Guam is a 210-square-mile tropical island located 3,950 miles from Hawaii. Although Guam is a U.S. territory, it is in the WHO-WPR. It is designated as a rural area based on its population density.
   Guam has three hospitals: the public Guam Memo- rial Hospital (GMA); the Guam Naval Hospital (GNH); and the private hospital, Guam Regional Medical Center (GRMC). ftere is a shortage of health-care professionals on the island, and Guam struggles to provide health care to the uninsured and those who receive public assistance for an estimated population of about 168,000.
  fte Guam Board of Nurse Examiners (GBNE) is a regulatory body of nurses appointed by the governor. An NP serves as the chair of the GBNE. fte administrative rules of the Board of Nursing were most recently revised and signed into law on May 7, 2008 (Public Law 29-71). Article 5 includes the rules for an advanced practice reg- istered nurse (APRN). An APRN is defined as an RN who is authorized by the board to perform APN as a cer- tified nurse practitioner (CNP), specifically as a CNM, CRNA, or CNS.
   Scope of practice for APRNs is in accordance with the functions and standards of the respective national certifying organization for each category. All APRNs in Guam are required to practice in accordance with pro- tocols developed in collaboration with and signed by a physician licensed to practice in Guam. fte board must approve a collaborative agreement between the APRN and physician. fte collaborating physician provides consultation and agrees to periodic review of the services being provided by the APRN. fte agreement must in- clude a written protocol to be used by the APRN for the management of patients and for the referral of cases and the procedure for an alternative collaborating physician. Periodic review of the agreement must be done during the first year after signing the agreement and then ev- ery 6 months thereafter. If the collaborative agreement is terminated, either by the physician or the APRN, the APRN must inform the board in writing within 3 work- ing days, and the license issued to the APRN will imme- diately terminate.
APRNs with a current license may apply for pre-
scribing authority and must submit documentation of successful completion of advanced pharmacology coursework. In addition, the APRN must provide

evidence of a minimum of 1,000 hours of practice as an APRN before application for prescriptive authority. fte 1,000 hours must include clinical hours completed and verified by the collaborative physician within the past 24 months. When approved, a new APRN license card is issued indicating the qualification for prescriptive authority. Prescribing stipulations include legend drugs, diagnostic studies, and therapeutic devices as outlined in the protocols section. Controlled substances (Sched- ule II–V), defined by federal controlled substances lists, will be prescribed and administered or ordered as estab- lished in the protocols, provided that the APRN has an assigned Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) reg- istration number.
fte Guam NPA revisions are modeled after the Na-
tional Council of the State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) NPA in the United States. fte NPA committee is work- ing on revising the Guam NPA in consultation with the Guam Nurses Association (GNA) and the Guam Associa- tion of Advanced Practice Registered Nurses (GAAPRN). Work is progressing, and it is hoped that Guam will be the next jurisdiction with full practice authority and APRN regulation with the major elements of the U.S. Consensus Model. Several professional organizations support APNs in Guam including the GAAPN, GNA, the Asian American/Pacific Islander Nurses Association, and the American Pacific Nursing Leaders Council.
Guam has been fortunate to have a strong relation-
ship with three representatives of the American Associa- tion of Nurse Practitioners (AANP). All are dedicated to increasing access to high-quality health care for Guam’s population. ftese three have made significant contribu- tions as NPs in Guam and provide constructive energy to facilitate APRN practice in Guam and the Pacific Ter- ritory. Guam’s nurses are very dedicated to their rural population’s health care. ftey are cohesive, belong to the GNA, and meet in professional conferences twice yearly. Men and women from Guam serve in the U.S. Army Reserves. When not serving overseas in active duty or deployments, these veterans receive health care from the VA Clinic located in Guam. As of July 2016, clinic staff included two physicians, one psychiatrist, and one NP in addition to RNs, LPNs, and health technicians. Psy- chiatrists and APRNs from the United States have also served there for short periods because recruitment is a
continual challenge.



  fte University of Hawaii School of Nursing (UH- SON) and Veterans Administration (VA) in Hawaii col- laborated on an interprofessional training opportunity at three rural VA sites: AMS, Guam, and Hilo, Hawaii. ftese sites were chosen because of their isolation and the challenge of recruiting skilled and culturally competent health-care professionals. fte goal is that trainees of this program will ultimately choose to serve in these loca- tions. fte DNP program director from UHSON and the director of education at Hawaii VA collaborated to implement this grant program. fte initial Rural Health Training Initiative (RHTI) grant was written as a 3-year pilot project that began in 2013 and has continued as a permanent course of studies.
Interest in APN in Guam is increasing. In 2010
there were only a handful of APRNs, including two to three NPs. As of July 2016, seven NP students were en- rolled in a distance-education program in Guam, but they faced real challenges because of a limited number of preceptors. fte GRMC has five NPs working in its emergency department. fte GMH is now considering changing its hospital regulation to potentially hire NP hospitalists. ftere are six NPs at the GNH. Several NPs work at Guam Public Health and several with the Vet- erans Administration Clinic (L. Lorenzo, personal com- munication, October 4, 2020).
Northern Mariana Islands
fte Northern Mariana Islands, officially the Common- wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI), are located in the northwestern Pacific Ocean. fte CNMI is one of two U.S. territories with commonwealth status (the other being Puerto Rico). According to the 2010 census, 53,883 people were living in the CNMI with the majority of the population living on Saipan, Tinian, and Rota.
   The Commonwealth Health Center (CHC) on the island of Saipan is the only provider of comprehen- sive health-care services for the island and includes one hospital in addition to a wide range of public health services. The 86-bed hospital is staffed with three NPs, one CNM, and four midwives. Rota and Tinian also have health centers that are part of the CHC. An NP, one of 31 health center personnel on Tinian, has been the only medical provider for more than 10 years.
  
fte CNMI Board of Nurse Examiners is the auton- omous public agency known as the Board of Nursing. fte governor appoints this regulatory body of nurses. fte Administrative Rules of the Board of Nursing (Sub- chapter 140-60.1), also known as the NPA, were most recently revised and signed into law in May and June 2014. An NP serves on the Board of Nursing and has helped model the NPA for full practice autonomy.
   An APN is defined as an RN who is authorized by the board to perform APN as a CNP, CNM, CRNA, or CNS. Scope of practice is in accordance with the functions and standards of the respective national certifying organizations for each category. Before 2007, many APNs were certificate graduates and were grandfathered into the NPA. Since January 2007, a minimum of a master’s degree in nursing is required. Documentation requires verification of graduation and certification in population foci of the education pro- gram and qualifications for prescribing. fte scope of practice for an NP includes nursing functions as well as advanced assessment, diagnosing, primary care pro- vider status, and admitting privileges for the hospital and other health-care services. NPs are independently responsible and accountable for the continuous and comprehensive management of a broad range of health care. fte NPA scope of practice includes prescribing, ordering, dispensing, and administering therapeutic devices, including legend drugs and controlled sub- stances (PL 14-62 Section 2304) consistent with the definition of the practitioner’s specialty category and scope of practice (L. Lorenzo, personal communica- tion, July 30, 2016).
Samoa
American Samoa (AMS) is the southernmost terri- tory of the United States with a total land area of 76.8 square miles, slightly larger than Washington, DC. fte 2010 population of 66,000 qualifies AMS as rural. fte health infrastructure consists of one hospital, five PHC centers, and a VA clinic. fte U.S. federal match for Medicaid services is capped, and the AMS government cannot bear the burden of paying for coverage beyond the match.
   AMS Chapter 10 laws include the health services regulatory board, which includes any practice of medi- cine, dentistry, or nursing. fte board is appointed by the



governor and is composed of the director of health, one physician, the public health officer, the director of nurs- ing services, a medical officer, a dentist, an LPN, and a representative from the AMS community college nurs- ing program. At least 50% of the board, excluding the chairperson, must be American Samoan. fte board may carry out its functions through the use of committees that specialize in health services such as nursing, med- icine, and pharmacy. fte Nursing Committee estab- lishes licensing and treatment, prescription, and other functions in collaboration with a physician or osteopath with established protocols, regulations, and the process of licensure.
fte practice of “advanced registered nursing” (ARN)
means the performance of advanced level nursing actions by a nurse-midwife, an NA, or an NP, who must have certification within the scope of practice and post-basic specialized education, training, and experience. fte ARN may perform actions of nursing diagnosis and nursing treatment of alterations of health status. In ad- dition, an ARN may perform actions of medical diagno- sis, treatment, prescription, and other functions that are identified by their certification specialty in collaboration with physicians or osteopaths. fte collaborating parties may establish by protocol higher levels of collaboration for specific acts or specific circumstances.
American Samoa participated in the 3-year RHTI
offered to three sites in the WPR (refer to the section on Guam). A total of nine students from UHSON participated in this project (2013–2015) based in Sa- moa with plans to send more depending on additional funding.
   Setting a precedent, a native from independent Sa- moa (Western Samoa) is the first Samoan NP to achieve a PhD in nursing and also earn her DNP. fterefore, she was bestowed the family title of a Fa’amatai (chief ). Fa’amatai is the key sociopolitical system of governance and way of life (fa’a Samoa) in Samoan culture. As a fac- ulty member, she has served as a preceptor for NP stu- dents from the UHSON for the VA RHTI. In addition, she and her students live in AMS villages and serve at the VA clinic providing health-care services. Another UH- SON Samoan student plans to return, after graduation from an educational program in the United States, to establish an NP practice in AMS (L. Lorenzo, personal communication, July 29, 2016).

Japan
fte anticipated dramatic increase in the aging popu- lation in Japan and a shortage of physicians led faculty at Oita University of Nursing and Health Sciences (OUNHS) to stress practice-oriented nursing educa- tion at the graduate level. fte aim of the promotion of academic education was to contribute to a health- care system that can provide patients in Japan with safe and timely opportunities for health care. With this in mind, the Graduate School of Oita Univer- sity established a course in 2008 to educate NPs in its master’s program. ftis was the first such course in Japan, and the March 2011 graduates of the mas- ter’s program became Japan’s first NPs (Fukuda et al., 2014; OUNHS, 2016).
ftere are two NP majors in the fields of primary care
with separate curricula in the Oita University Graduate School: the geriatrics major, established in 2008, and the pediatrics major, established in 2009. fte objectives of the new majors are to train highly qualified NPs with higher levels of expertise and competence in practice who can contribute to clinical care in medical long-term care facilities in remote areas and work autonomously in collaboration with physicians (OUNHS, 2016). ftis program development provided momentum to encour- age the government to amend the nurse practice laws. Policy and legal changes are needed to delineate the scope of practice for APN and to provide the foundation for NP education (Fukuda et al., 2014).
In order to support the establishment of an NP
system in Japan, the Japanese Nurse Practitioner Asso- ciation was established in 2008. fte aims of the associ- ation are to standardize educational programs for NPs, to guarantee the quality of their performance, and to work for social understanding of the title of NP in Japan (OUNHS, 2016).
   Following the initiation of the NP course by OUNHS, the university project team also submitted an application in collaboration with Oita Oka Hospital to arrange for a designated administration district system. In the system, NP students and graduates would be allowed to perform some of the designated activities for hospital patients un- der the supervision of and with physician orders. In addi- tion, in 2013 the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare introduced plans for a new education system. fte bill for the amendment of the nursing service law had not been



changed for 66 years. Legislative discussions commenced in February 2014 with a hope for legal changes (Fukuda et al., 2014). However, the amendment, implemented in October 2015, ended up legislating a training sys- tem for nurses to perform specific medical interventions (Japanese Nursing Association, 2016), in contrast to in- ternationally recognized definitions of APN, which rec- ommend graduate-level education and do not emphasize specific advanced skills alone.
   As of May 2020, there was no official professional designation of NP yet by the Japanese government, even though the Japanese Organization of Nurse Practitioner Faculties (JONPF) and the Japan Association of Nurs- ing Programs in Universities (JANPU) provided the certifying examination for the graduates from eight NP programs. Nursing and medical societies have opposed the policy and legal changes supportive of APN. ftere- fore, the activities of graduates from the NP programs depend on support from the physician(s) in the insti- tution where the graduates work (M. Suzuki, personal communication, April 22, 2020).
New Zealand
fte concept of APN was initially recognized in New Zealand in 1988 at two levels. fte New Zealand Nurses’ Organization’s (NZNO) credentialing process certified nurses as nurse-clinicians or nurse consultants (clinical). Following a Ministerial Taskforce on Nursing in 1998, barriers to nursing practice (including nurse prescribing) were identified and development of an APN role was recommended. When an NP model was introduced in 2000, NZNO began to phase out its certification pro- cess, which ceased in 2006.
   Regulation of NPs subsequently came under the jurisdiction of the Nursing Council of New Zealand (NCNZ), the regulatory authority responsible for the registration of nurses and NPs in the country. A regu- latory framework was presented in 2002 and updated in 2014. fte framework includes standards for the ap- proval of specific master’s programs and a process for such approval, title protection (NP), role competencies, and description of the role as well as a process for en- dorsement (Carryer & Adams, 2020).
  fte first NP in New Zealand was endorsed in 2001. By this time, nursing leaders had decided that the NP would have a separate scope of practice and that the title

would be endorsed by the national regulator, the NCNZ. ftese actions have enabled the NCNZ to protect pub- lic safety by authenticating that NPs are competent and fit for practice. In addition, clarity was provided to the public, policymakers, and other health-care professionals regarding the scope of NP practice (Carryer & Adams, 2020). Before 2015, NPs in New Zealand were required to choose a specific area of practice that was then placed on the register as a condition for practice. Following ex- tensive consultation in 2015 regarding this stipulation, the NCNZ recommended changes that broadened the NP scope of practice and removed the requirement that restricts NPs to identify a specific area of practice. In 2017 a revised scope of practice statement was intro- duced. fte revised scope of practice follows:
Nurse practitioners have advanced education, clinical training and the demonstrated competence and legal authority to practice beyond the level of a registered nurse. Nurse practitioners work autonomously and in collaborative teams with other health pro- fessionals to promote health, prevent disease, and improve access and population health outcomes for a specific patient group or community. Nurse practitioners manage episodes of care as the lead healthcare provider in partnership with health consumers and their families/whanau [extended family]. Nurse practi- tioners combine advanced nursing knowledge and skills with diagnostic reasoning and therapeutic knowledge to provide patient centred healthcare services including the diagnosis and management of health consumers with common and complex health conditions. They provide a wide range of assessment and treatment interventions, ordering and interpreting diagnostic and laboratory tests, prescribing medicines within their area of competence, admitting and discharging from hospital and other healthcare services/settings. As clinical leaders they work across healthcare settings, influence health service delivery and the wider profession. (Carryer & Adams, 2020, p. 129)
   NPs in New Zealand are required to be experienced RNs who have completed a master’s degree in nursing and demonstrate advanced practice competencies. NPs have prescriptive authority within their area of compe- tence with the same authority as medical practitioners (NCNZ, 2019). Qualifications for application as an NP in New Zealand include that the NP must:
• Be registered with the NCNZ in the registered nurse scope of practice
• Complete an approved clinical master’s degree pro-
gram for the NP scope of practice



• Have at least 4 years’ experience in a practice area
• Pass an assessment against the NP competencies given by an NCNZ approved assessor
(Carryer & Adams, 2020, p. 130)
   fte NP applicant formally applies to the NCNZ and must present documentation that includes a curricu- lum vitae; transcript of education preparation; research; publications; teaching; and evidence of clinical practice that includes descriptions, case studies, case notes from assessments, and endorsements of practice. fte panel interview assessment includes a presentation by the applicant describing relevant clinical practice and a re- sponse to panel questions. NP candidates can focus on a specialty area of practice; however, this designation no longer appears on the register or on the NP practicing certificate (NCNZ, 2019).
Nurse Practitioners New Zealand (NPNZ) is an
organization that aims to offer a collective voice and act as a resource for the advancement of NP practice in   the   country  (http://www.nurse.org.nz/npnz-nurse
-practitioners-nz.html).

Philippines
APN in the Philippines is partly recognized through the Nursing Specialty Certification Program (NSCP), which was formally launched through a Board of Nursing res- olution in 1999 (Board of Nursing Resolution, 2002). Nursing leaders introduced the Nursing Specialty Certi- fication Council, which credentials nurses and accredits organizations and educational programs, highlighting the practice of specialized nursing. ftis is further en- forced through the Comprehensive Nursing Specialty Program stipulated under the Philippine Nursing Law of 2002. Qualified nurses may be given certification in three levels—Nurse Clinician I, Nurse Clinician II, and Clinical Nurse Specialist—and may work under four ma- jor groups of nursing specialties: medical-surgical, com- munity health, maternal and child health, and mental health/psychiatry (Philippine Board of Nursing, 2008). ftese policies provide for an informal category of nurses working in specialty areas across secondary, tertiary, and specialty hospitals. ftese nurses may or may not be cre- dentialed under the NSCP. Most of these nurses are pre- pared through formal or informal education within their home institutions.
  
Nurses in the Philippines are prepared through bac- calaureate entry-level programs. fte number of nurs- ing schools opened by colleges and universities has responded to demands abroad for nurses and has shown up, down, and horizontal movement through the years. Several nursing programs offer master’s degrees with most emphasizing degrees in nursing administration, whereas two well-established university-based institu- tions offer master’s degrees emphasizing advanced and/ or specialty nursing practice. ftere are also at least three nursing doctoral programs in the country, preparing nurse scientists or academicians (V. Manila Maderal, personal communication, May 15, 2020).
Currently, there is no policy that formalizes the po-
sition of an APN in the Philippines; neither are there explicit standards of practice for those who may be work- ing as APNs. In most health institutions, the generalist and specialty-area nurses have the same job descriptions with a similar sense of patient and professional account- ability. A study conducted to evaluate nursing practice and its relevance to APN (Manila, 2013) revealed the following findings:
• Nurses in the Philippines function in specialized prac- tice but with limited role expansion.
• Education for advanced practice is fragmented.
• Advanced practice across institutions is not standardized.
• ftere are notable similarities to international APN
frameworks but also foundational gaps.
   As of May 2020, several groups of nurses have been empowered through accredited nursing organizations, whereas others have initiated programs in their respective health-care institutions. Some of these nurses are recog- nized as diabetes nurse educators, wound care nurses, re- nal (dialysis) nurses, and nurse-midwives, whereas others have been given opportunities to participate in outpatient activities for palliative care. fte challenge among these programs has been twofold: the public demand for ade- quate health care and the referral system within the hu- man health resource framework. ftese challenges provide the motivation to formulate an APN framework in the Philippines that would define systems, scopes of practice, and standards that will ultimately contribute to better health for the total population in the country (V. Manila Maderal, personal communication, May 15, 2020).



People’s Republic of China
APN roles are informally being implemented across the People’s Republic of China (PR China) in recognition of the need to expand the scope of nursing practice to meet changing population and health-care delivery needs as well as to build a higher level of nursing practice in the country (Wong & Wong, 2020). In noting this situa- tion, the Chinese government has given approval for clinical/professional degrees at the master’s level, aimed at educating nurses to develop advanced practice com- petencies. By 2011, 28 universities in PR China had recruited nursing students into clinical/professional de- gree programs in various clinical areas, indicating a new developmental phase in graduate nursing education. In 2014, 58 new clinical/professional master’s programs had been approved (Hill & Parker, 2015). As of May 2020, that number was 85 (Wong & Wong, 2020).
In the PR China, nursing has traditionally been situ-
ated as a discipline under medicine. Nursing was upgraded to a first-level discipline with the autonomy to define its own curriculum and education in 2011 and is increasingly evolving toward increased professionalization. APNs with postgraduate education qualifications are an important component of this progress. As of May 2020, there was no national system to standardize the competencies, edu- cational requirements, and certification of APN. In spite of this, many provinces are delivering education based on their perspective of what an APN should be. As an exam- ple, in 2018, supported by the Hong Kong Academy of Nursing, 32 nurses from Guangzhou completed an assess- ment to grant them status similar to an APN following completion and documentation of clinical experience and publications (Wong & Wong, 2020).
fte need to develop specialty nursing was first
mentioned in the Chinese Career Development Plan (2002–2010). In ensuing 5-year plans, the need to de- velop specialty nursing continued to be emphasized. In the 2011–2015 strategic plan, a total of 25,000 special- ized nurses were specified to be developed in critical care, emergency, renal dialysis, oncology, and operating room nursing (Ministry of Health of the People’s Republic of China, 2012). In addition, population needs have been identified in the community for those with chronic ill- ness and rehabilitation needs, older patients, and those in need of palliative care. Even though China has no national system to standardize credentialing of APNs, progress continues in the development of this concept.

Singapore
fte National University of Singapore (NUS), under the auspices of the Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, estab- lished a Master of Nursing (MN) program in 2003, offer- ing academic preparation in acute care, adult health, and mental health, while viewing the course of studies as ge- neric in emphasis. In 2009, specialty offerings expanded to critical care and, in 2012, to pediatrics. fte program then evolved in 2019 to focus on adult health as well as pediat- rics with both streams including preparation in common psychological conditions. ftis change is intended to meet the ever-changing health-care needs in Singapore.
   Following graduation from the 18-month full-time master’s degree program, students must complete the minimum of a 1-year internship in their specialty be- fore applying for certification, licensure, and registration with the Singapore Nursing Board (SNB). Until the 2018–2019 academic year, a final national Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) was conducted by the SNB after the 1-year internship and at the con- clusion of the certification process (Ayre & Bee, 2014). Since then, MN students take the OSCE before the 1-year internship. fterefore, the SNB no longer hosts the final certification OSCE, and a rigorous work-based assessment via clinical portfolio development has been adopted for the APN licensing process.
fte APN Register, established in 2005 by the MOH,
provides a systematic process for the APN to become a key player in Singapore’s drive to keep health care afford- able while maintaining high-quality services. Consistent with this view and to support developing professional- ism for nursing, the MOH established a clinical nursing career path that includes the APN roles. fte clinical ca- reer track is similar to those that exist for nursing man- agement and education tracks.
   Registration to practice as an APN is renewed on an annual basis with the SNB. To renew the APN practic- ing certificate (PC), APNs must fulfill the requirements stipulated by the SNB to demonstrate that they have maintained their competency. Requirements include achievement of a minimum number of clinical hours related to their level of practice and number of years postcertification plus acquiring 30 continuing education (CE) points in every qualifying period (QP) in categories as stipulated by the SNB.
   Key decision makers in education, policy, and admin- istration are working to adapt models and frameworks



from the United States while at the same time attempting to introduce APN roles to the public that are suitable for hospital and community settings in the country. Visibil- ity and support for this advancement in nursing are ev- idenced by the MOH’s request that Singapore have 200 APNs in place in various specialties by 2014 (Ayre & Bee, 2014). In 2019, there were 238 registered APNs with 225 in the public sector in Singapore (MOH, 2019).
   In 2018, the National Collaborative Prescribing Pro- gramme was initiated. Since July 2018, APNs who have undergone the National Prescribing Programme can pre- scribe under the Collaborative Practice Agreement with a physician (B. Woo and W. Zhou, personal communi- cation, May 3, 2020).

Republic of South Korea
It could be said that NP-like nursing roles have been in place in Korea since the time of the “medicine lady” in the 15th century. Care provided by the medicine ladies included deliveries, physical examinations, acupuncture, and prescribing of herbal medicines. Community health nurse practitioners (CHNPs) have provided comprehen- sive primary health-care services (PHC) in rural com- munities of South Korea since the health-care law for provision of health care for rural residents was legislated in 1980. fte scope of practice for the CHNPs includes diagnosis, prescriptive authority, and referral to other practitioners. In addition, home visits, health education, disease management, immunizations, school health ser- vices, and care for older patients are part of the health-care service provision with additional support from nurses and community helpers. Despite the Republic of South Ko- rea’s historical reliance on CHNPs, it is becoming more difficult to attract nurses to work in rural areas.
Discussions attempting to clarify issues related to
APNs began in the 1990s. In 2003, the medical law re- vision identified qualifications for the APN and desig- nated 13 areas of specialization. Qualifications include master’s-level education, passage of the certification ex- amination, and experience in a chosen specialty. fte first certification examination was given in 2005. As in many countries, the Korean Nurses Association faces difficulty obtaining consensus from the nursing community on scope of practice, educational requirements, and titling (Schober & Affara, 2006; Sheer & Wong, 2008).
  fte nurse specialist system was formalized in Ko- rea to fulfill changes in the medical environment. Even

though APN roles were identified in this law, the role has not been officially legislated. Although APNs have existed in the country for more than 20 years, strong emphasis on the value of the physician role has inhibited professional recognition to allow APNs to develop au- tonomy. Challenges include absence of legal regulations on scope of practice for APNs, no health insurance cov- erage for APN services, increased medical support staff without appropriate qualifications, and disagreement regarding the qualifications for APN clinical practice (Leem et al., 2019). Based on a lack of nursing policy for APNs, nursing leaders emphasize the necessity of a defined and legislated scope of practice and function for APNs in response to the changing health-care environ- ment in the country (Oh et al., 2019; Seol et al., 2017).

Taiwan
Taiwan has a long history of nursing education and prac- tice evolving from apprenticeships, to hospital-based programs, to academic professional education in institu- tions of higher learning. Since the 1990s, NPs have been mainly educated in hospital settings. Hospital-based NP training involved faculty consisting of hospital physi- cians and health-care providers from varying disciplines and was focused on the medical and surgical aspects of patient care. A significant improvement was the estab- lishment of the first university MSN program for NPs in 2004. fte first DNP/NP program was established at the National Yang-Ming University in Taipei in 2018.
Historically, NPs were listed along with “professional
nurse” as a legal position in nursing. In 1991, the Nurses Act was passed in an attempt to alleviate the nursing shortage and allow nurses to practice independently. Formal NP programs were implemented in 2000 after an amendment to the Nurses Act made the NP title offi- cial (Chao, 2008). With the passage of Article 24 of the Nurses Act, NPs became legally able to provide care un- der the supervision of a physician (Chin et al., 2015). In general, practice guidelines allow NPs to practice more independently under hospital approval.
   Initially, NPs functioned without practice guidelines and standards. fte Department of Health (DOH), in conjunction with the National Health Research In- stitute (NHRI) and the Taiwan Association of Nurse Practitioners (TANP), established practice standards for hospital training programs, curriculum development guidelines, and preceptor guidelines. In 2014–2015, an



interprofessional task force was convened by the Ministry of Health and Welfare (MOHW) to define the NP scope of practice. fte new scope-of-practice guidelines were submitted by the TANP and became nationally regulated in January 2016. fte newly defined NP scope of practice allowed NPs to work under the direct supervision of phy- sicians or practice as NPs under collaboratively developed standardized procedures for specific medical practices without on-site supervision of the physician (Goodyear, 2018). During 2015–2017, NP practice guidelines were refined to more fully and accurately describe the role of the NP (S. Tsay, personal communication, June 3, 2020). In 2019, under the leadership of Department of Nursing and Health Care (DNHC) Director General Dr. Shwu-Feng Tsay, the following recommendations for NP education improvement were identified: (1) the need for recognition of NP graduate education programs and more flexible learning models; (2) development of a na- tionally standardized NP licensing examination process with bi-yearly examinations; (3) application of innovative new technologies in teaching and standardized licensing examinations; (4) development of an NP database and online survey platform of practice; (5) initiation of pilot projects for NP practice in remote areas; and (6) estab- lishment of a standing committee to review NP regula-
tions (S. Tsay, personal communication, June 3, 2020).
   In a 2020 assessment of the NP/APN role develop- ment, the following necessary actions were identified:
(1) upgrade NP education and compensation; (2) in- crease NP practice in the community; (3) extend the scope of practice and independence of the NP/APN role;
(4) explore additional NP roles to fit Taiwan’s needs for improving health outcomes; (5) explore alternate health- care delivery options and solutions; and (6) upgrade cur- rent policies and practices to support advancement of the NP/APN role through legislation and updated regu- lations (S. Tsay, personal communication, June 3, 2020). As of June 2020, one method considered for educat- ing NP/MSN students was a “practitioner degree pro- gram,” a partnership between universities and hospitals whereby universities would provide academic coursework and hospitals would provide clinical internships. Estab- lishing university and hospital partnerships was the out- come of ongoing discussions to determine (1) the types and roles of the NP/APN needed for improving health care, (2) how to identify and provide for the health needs

of older patients, and (3) how to ensure that this role is recognized as an important workforce resource for the country. fte goal is to elevate 1,200 to 1,600 RNs to NP status per year through MSN or hospital education pro- grams (S. Tsay, personal communication, June 3, 2020). Certification of the NP consists of several steps. NP can- didates must (1) meet educational requirements, (2) suc- cessfully pass the written examination, (3) successfully pass clinical performance requirements, and (4) apply for the certificate. As of June 2020, the current testing method for NP certification is being upgraded to include national testing standards and the use of innovative technologies in
testing (S. Tsay, personal communication, June 3, 2020).
   A potential improvement could be the use of tools for virtual student/client examination as well as broadening the scope of case studies to meet the needs of the NP working in the community. As of 2019, there were 8,515 certified NPs in Taiwan practicing in acute care, psychi- atry, pediatrics, and women’s health. Plans include add- ing practice areas in anesthesia and community health (S. Tsay, personal communication, June 3, 2020).
  In an effort to encourage nurses to work inde- pendently in the community while building a core workforce to serve patients with chronic conditions, a program was initiated by the DNHC in 2017. ftirty registered nurses were trained as home visiting nurses and offered the opportunity to pursue NP master’s de- grees. fte program is anticipated to result in an ongoing workforce of MSN prepared NPs committed to actively practicing in the community.
   In 2017, a long-term health-care program for older patients was introduced and later implemented in 2020. A population who is living longer with more chronic diseases has resulted in the need for community-based health-care and NP services. A scholarship training pro- gram was developed to encourage nurses or NPs to pursue advanced education in order to practice in the commu- nity (S. Tsay, personal communication, June 3, 2020).
  ftrough an educational grant from the DNHC, a program was developed to provide remote access to health-care and NP services for Aboriginal and other Taiwanese island inhabitants provided by one or more NPs from the islands’ indigenous communities (S. Tsay, personal communication, June 3, 2020).
   fte initiation of a nursing home accreditation pro- cess is another goal being undertaken by the DNHC.



ftis accreditation process involves assessment of approx- imately 1,500 nursing home institutions, assessment of clinical care safety and quality within the institutions, and the establishment of a payment plan for long-term care services provided within these institutions. An ac- creditation process began implementation in June 2020 (S. Tsay, personal communication, June 3, 2020).
   fte use of innovative approaches and new technol- ogies are being explored by the DNHC in partnership with corporate technology entities. A home-based hos- pice care platform is being researched for patients and their families to access available and affordable care for end-of-life patients. Clients will be able to search avail- able programs and services through their smartphones. Projected benefits are improved quality of life and longer life (S. Tsay, personal communication, June 3, 2020).
  fte DNHC, as part of Taiwan’s MOHW, has made significant strides in advancing nurses as valued health professionals and team members within the country’s health-care system. ftis has been achieved by working to expand the role of the NP; upgrading NP education; re- vising the NP certification process; expanding NP fields of specialization; establishing nursing services beyond the boundaries of major cities; and incorporating ad- vanced technologies in NP education, certification, and patient care. fte end result is expected to be notable im- provements in the quality and accessibility of health care for the citizens of Taiwan (R. T. Goodyear & S. F. Tsay, personal communication, June 3, 2020).

SUMMARY

Descriptions of APN development in various countries and research reported in the international literature confirm the benefits of APN and support the view that advanced nursing roles are feasible, sustainable, and pro- vide high-quality, competent health care. However, leg- islation and regulations often lag behind actual practice. Disagreement exists between legislated practice acts of various health-care professionals. Progress supportive of APN seems, at times, similar to an intricate maze or puz- zle than a picture of coordinated forward motion.
   International momentum supportive of APN services is increasing; however, initiatives face obstacles and chal- lenges as leaders attempt to activate schemes that will

ultimately change the profile of the health-care workforce and delivery systems. For APN to thrive in health-care systems globally, the author recommends that several topics need to be confronted, discussed, and managed successfully. Topics that must be addressed include role ambiguity and the need for role clarity, title protection and a defined scope of practice, and requirements for educational preparation along with standardized creden- tialing. A well-developed scope of practice that engages APNs in a wide range of activities including health-care planning and policy development, in addition to health promotion, disease prevention, diagnosis and treatment of illness, is essential. ftis scope of practice should em- brace the diversity of health-care systems worldwide without losing APN core characteristics.
Challenges lie in the capacity of APN advocates and
decision makers to achieve consistency across clinical and educational models. Continually evaluating and reviewing practice by adding competencies that reflect dynamic changes in health care and role development is fundamental. Increasingly, APNs will be asked to pro- vide evidence that they are a cost-effective, valued, and sustainable addition to health-care teams. Research that provides evidence demonstrating the ability of APNs to provide care in partnership with patients and their families, within communities, and in collaboration with other health-care professionals will provide a strong foundation for the addition of APN to comprehensive health-care services.




UNIT 
2
The Practice Environment
































103


















Advanced Practice Nurses and Prescriptive Authority
Jan Towers



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Identify issues related to prescriptive authority in advanced nursing practice.
• Summarize the evolution of prescriptive authority for advanced practice nurses (APNs).
• Trace the patterns of statutory and regulatory policy that have governed prescrip-
tive authority for APNs.
• Describe obstacles to achieving full (plenary) prescriptive authority for APNs.
• Explain the statutory and regulatory changes necessary to achieve full (plenary) prescriptive authority.
• Distinguish prescriptive authority among nurse practitioners, clinical nurse spe-
cialists, certified registered nurse anesthetists, and certified nurse-midwives.
• Make predictions about the future of prescriptive authority for APNs.










105



DEVELOPMENT OF AUTHORITY TO PRACTICE

As professional nurses expanded their role to cross into traditional medical domains, the ability to prescribe medications became increasingly important. Although certified registered nurse anesthetists (CRNAs), certified nurse-midwives (CNMs), and clinical nurse specialists (CNSs) had practiced in advanced roles for some time before the arrival of nurse practitioners (NPs), the advent of NPs in primary care influenced the authorization of all advanced practice nurses (APNs) to prescribe medica- tions. Before that time, CRNAs selected and administered anesthesia but not other medications. Likewise, CNMs traditionally focused on childbirth and did not require extensive prescriptive authority. CNSs functioned in roles with diagnosed patients who were under the care of a phy- sician. Although professionals in each of these roles made judgments regarding medications used by patients under their care, they relied mainly on physicians to provide pre- scriptions for medications when they were needed.

Nurse Practitioners and Prescriptive Authority
As NPs began to provide primary care services, they used the same traditional processes to provide medications for the patients they served. Although primary care practice places an emphasis on health promotion and disease pre- vention, most patients coming for primary care services do so with a health problem for which they are seeking assistance. As time went on, it became evident that de- pending on physicians to prescribe medications created problems in the areas of patient access to care, continu- ity of care, and patient flow. When providing primary care, NPs assessed and diagnosed patients who needed prescription medications and treatments for their care.
fte inability to sign one’s own prescription, even if a
physician was on-site, was inconvenient for the NP, phy- sician, and patient alike. It caused interruptions in the physician’s interactions with patients, unnecessary delays each time NPs had to wait to get signed prescriptions from physicians, and often reduced the credibility of NPs by rendering them dependent on physicians to sign for medications that were being ordered based on the NPs’  own diagnostic decision making. ftese problems

were exacerbated when a physician was not on-site. Pa- tients then had to wait for prescriptions to be signed be- fore they could be filled. If a physician was not available for a day or more, the implications for patient safety and health care were serious.
   Methods were found to get around this stumbling block, such as calling prescriptions in to pharmacies or using other more questionable methods for obtaining a physician signature on the prescription so that the pa- tient could pursue treatment in a timely manner. fte need for NPs to prescribe under their own names was evident and pressing.
   In the early days, NPs did not have title recognition other than that of registered nurse (RN) in their state reg- ulatory systems. ftey were not alone; with the exception of CNMs and CRNAs in several states, no APNs had title recognition in statutory or regulatory language in the state nurse practice acts or administrative rules. Likewise, there was no authority to prescribe medications. In fact, many nurse practice acts clearly prohibited the prescrib- ing of medication by nurses, regardless of specialty or sta- tus. ftus began the long journey of convincing legislators and regulators to change state statutes and regulations to give title recognition and prescriptive authority to APNs. Because licensure for all professions occurs at the state rather than the federal level, the movement to achieve these goals moved unevenly as states with the most need moved forward to make changes. fte movement was en- hanced in the early days by an acute shortage of primary care physicians, and some states with higher primary care needs moved forward more rapidly than others. At that time, rural states were more likely to initiate statu- tory and regulatory adjustments than were states with
large urban populations.
   Convincing decision makers in the states was not without its problems. ften, as now, NPs had to demon- strate that they had the knowledge base to safely diag- nose illnesses and prescribe medications. ftis meant that educational programs had to demonstrate that their cur- riculums prepared NPs for an independent prescribing role. Advanced pathophysiology and pharmacology and the development of differential diagnosis and clinical decision-making skills needed to be visible in the pro- grams. With the advent of federal grants to prepare NPs, the content and quality of the preparatory programs was increasingly standardized.



   In addition, for NPs to be credible in health-care sys- tems, it was necessary for members of the medical com- munity to advocate for recognition of these professionals and their ability to prescribe medications independently. Many did, and through this window of opportunity, NPs began to gain prescriptive authority state by state over subsequent years.
   Initially, the authority to practice and prescribe was limited. In many of the early states where some form of prescriptive authority was conferred, boards of med- icine and boards of nursing were authorized to jointly promulgate rules and regulations governing NP actions, including prescriptive authority. States such as North Carolina and Idaho were among the first states with jointly promulgated rules. Even today, NPs in a few states still fall under the regulation of both boards of nursing and boards of medicine. Some of those states (where the highest degree of controversy over scope of practice has traditionally existed) are limited to joint regulation of prescriptive authority. Recent attempts to change that regulatory pattern have been harder to achieve.
Initially, NPs were authorized to prescribe a limited
number of medications under physician supervision. North Carolina was one of the first states to develop a limited drug formulary. Subsequently, states developed combinations of formularies and physician oversight un- der jointly promulgated rules or under rules developed by boards of nursing. fte form of those rules depended largely on the persuasiveness of NPs and the attitudes of the legislators and governors of those states.
   Currently, NPs prescribe legend and controlled drugs under their own signature in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. Variation exists among states in the area of authorization to prescribe controlled drugs and the rela- tionship, if any, that must be maintained with a physician. Currently, there exists plenary prescriptive authority (no requirement for any physician involvement) in 22 jurisdic- tions (states) including the District of Columbia (American Academy of Nurse Practitioners [AANP], 2020).

Nurse-Midwives and Prescriptive Authority
CNMs have had to undergo the same process as other APNs to attain prescriptive authority. Because their ed- ucational preparation and role developed to include not only obstetrical and newborn care but also the general

health management of their patients, the need to pre- scribe a broader range of medications also increased, making the previously described arrangement for pre- scribing under the physician’s signature unreasonable.
   Federal funding of CNM educational programs helped to implement the standards established by this discipline and facilitate the passage of statutes and rules that allow them to prescribe in 50 states and the District of Columbia with variable limitations in the area of con- trolled drugs. In the majority of these jurisdictions, the prescriptive authority is full practice (plenary) (National Council of State Boards of Nursing [NCSBN], 2016).
   Other factors that have assisted in this endeavor include an enthusiastic consumer population, especially pregnant women, who spread the word about the skills of CNMs. ftey have often packed hearing rooms and legislative cham- bers, bringing their babies and children, providing testi- mony regarding the worth and skill of the services provided to them by CNMs. CNMs have the same state-to-state variability regarding authorization to prescribe controlled drugs and required relationships, if any, with physicians.

Clinical Nurse Specialists and Prescriptive Authority
CNSs have more recently felt the need to prescribe med- ications for the patients they serve. ftose particularly de- sirous of the authorization are the psychiatric and mental health CNSs who often have their own practices or func- tion autonomously in mental health clinics and other specialty practices. fte prescriptive authority need for practitioners in this field is particularly acute in agencies serving vulnerable populations.
  fte remainder of the CNS community has had mixed responses to the need for authorization to pre- scribe medications. At the core of this ambivalence is the role played by the CNS in the employment setting, the scope of prescriptive authority needed when work- ing in a particular specialty with patients who have already been diagnosed, the educational preparation required to allow for this authorization, and the risk of being unnecessarily placed under the supervision of physicians in states where such supervision is required. Some states do not even provide title recognition for CNSs. ftere has been controversy regarding whether an additional title recognition is actually needed for



CNSs. fterefore, the issue of prescriptive authority for CNSs has been cloudier than that for NPs or CNMs (National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists [NACNS], 2002).
   Nevertheless, CNSs have begun to obtain title recog- nition (often driven by the need for recognition to re- ceive reimbursement for services) and the authority to prescribe within their scope of practice. Over half the states authorize CNSs to prescribe medications in one fashion or another, and over half offer full (plenary) au- thority (NCSBN, 2016). Variability in recognizing who may qualify, scope of prescriptive authority, ability to pre- scribe controlled substances, and required relationships with physicians occurs from state to state. In some states the statutes and regulations are similar to those of NPs, and in others they are not. A few states have extended prescriptive authority to psychiatric and mental health CNSs only. A few have grouped all APNs under one set of regulations, whereas most have kept the four clinical groups separated under an APN umbrella that allows for regulatory variability among APNs in their states.

Nurse Anesthetists and Prescriptive Authority
fte authority of CRNAs to select and administer anesthe- sia has long been recognized. Until recently, CRNAs have been less involved in the struggle to obtain prescriptive authority than the other three disciplines. Some repre- sentatives from the CRNA community have maintained that ordering and administering anesthesia does not fall under the rubric of prescriptive authority in its tradi- tional sense (American Association of Nurse Anesthetists [AANA], 2020). Increasingly, however, CRNAs are be- coming involved in pain management of patients in the practices they serve and thus have the need to prescribe. Currently, nurse anesthetists have prescriptive authority in 30 states; 23 of those states still require collaboration with or supervision by a physician, and 28 award ple- nary authority (NCSBN, 2016). As with the other APN groups, CRNAs have found that they have to work to convince legislators and governors of their knowledge and skills. fteir availability in rural areas has enhanced their ability to obtain these privileges, even in the pres- ence of opposition from the medical community. As with NPs, CNMs, and CNSs, they have had to demonstrate

the strength of their educational programs and the safety of their practice to obtain privileges in this area.

THE ROAD TO STATUTORY AND
REGULATORY CHANGE TO AUTHORIZE PRESCRIPTIVE AUTHORITY


To alter state statutes and regulations, APNs had to ed- ucate state legislatures, executive officers, and regulators regarding the role of the APNs they represented. In ad- dition, they had to demonstrate a need for APNs to pre- scribe and prove that prescribing by APNs was safe and contributed to the well-being of the population.
   ftere are a variety of ways to authorize prescriptive authority within a state. Changes (amendments) may be made to nurse practice acts (statutes), new statutes may be developed separate from nurse practice acts, or changes may be made in states’ administrative codes through the development of regulations promulgated by the appropri- ate regulating board (in most cases the board of nursing). In the case of new statutes or statutory changes, legislation must be introduced that amends or adds to current law to give title recognition and prescriptive au- thority to APNs (NPs, CNMs, CNSs, or CRNAs). Once legislation is introduced, it is referred to a committee of jurisdiction (usually a professional licensure committee) for consideration. Once the legislation is in committee, the chair of that committee generally calls for a hearing to allow proponents and opponents of the legislation to give testimony regarding the introduced legislation. After hearings are conducted, at the chair’s discretion, the committee votes on the legislation and passes it out of committee. In some states, proposed legislation must also go through the appropriations committee of at least one of the voting chambers to determine cost and evaluate the fiscal impact on the state. After passing through all appropriate committees, the legislation, at the discretion of the majority party leadership, is taken to the floor of the voting chamber for a vote. Sometimes this is done simultaneously in both chambers of the state legislature; in others, the legislation passes through one chamber at a time. Once the legislation has been agreed upon (passed) by both chambers of the legislature, it is sent to the governor to be signed or, in the case of some
states, to be vetoed.



   During this process, language changes in proposed legislation are often made or negotiated to satisfy other interested parties. For this reason, the language of au- thorizing statutes varies to a certain extent from state to state. ftis is particularly true in the sections (a) defining procedures to be followed and requirements that must be met to be recognized as an APN; (b) defining the re- lationship, if any, that must be held with a physician to prescribe; and (c) determining the scope of prescriptive authority of the APN, particularly the authorization to prescribe controlled drugs (Schedules I through V). As statutes are passed, much time and energy go into at- tempting to negotiate language that is acceptable to the advanced practice community, involved legislators, gov- ernors, regulatory bodies, and other interested parties. Once statutes have been passed and signed by the gov- ernor of a state, rules and regulations are developed and approved by the authorized regulatory body or bodies.
When regulations are developed, they are first written
as proposed rules and are placed in a public register for comment. fte comment period covers a limited time, after which the promulgating boards consider the com- ments and make appropriate changes in the proposed rule at their discretion before publishing a final rule. In most states, such regulations must then be approved by some arm of the legislature, often committees of jurisdic- tion, sometimes by one or the other legislative chamber, before approval by the governor. For this reason, APNs and regulatory bodies are often embroiled in negotia- tions similar to those encountered in the legislative pro- cess that result in alterations that make for variance in regulations from state to state. ftese variations are in the same general areas where there is variability in statute.
Because the purpose of state regulatory bodies, such
as boards of nursing, is to protect the public (in this case, public health), boards of nursing vary in their advocacy of advanced practice roles in the regulatory process. In most states, governors appoint the members of the pro- fessional licensure boards. Having APNs who understand the roles of NPs, CNMs, CNSs, and CRNAs appointed to these positions can help the regulatory process when issues such as prescriptive authority are considered.
   Several states, rather than introducing or altering statutes to authorize APN prescriptive authority, have instead developed and instituted regulatory changes in the administrative code by which the advanced practice

disciplines must abide. Although regulation cannot over- ride statute, statutes are often worded broadly enough for regulations regarding title recognition and authoriza- tion to prescribe drugs to be developed by the regulatory body or bodies without disturbing statutes.

Patterns of Statutory and Regulatory Authority
Four basic patterns of regulation regarding prescriptive authority have evolved and existed over time:
• fte use of an established formulary or lists of drugs that the APN can prescribe
• A negative, or exclusionary, formulary that allows the
APN to prescribe all drugs with the exception of a short list of forbidden drugs
• An individualized, collaborative formulary established
by the APN with a collaborating physician
• Unlimited authority with no formulary or collabora- tive requirements

Regulator Established Formulary
An established formulary was used in the early days of APN prescribing activity to determine an agreed-on list of drugs that APNs could prescribe. As new drugs came onto the market, updating of these formularies was needed to allow prescribing according to current practice standards. Although this quickly became a cumbersome process, it is still in use today in a few instances, usually in facility policy.
Negative or Exclusionary Formulary
Exclusionary formularies were found to be a more prac- tical approach to regulation of prescriptive authority. Creating a short list of drugs (e.g., chemotherapy, gold treatments) that APNs were forbidden to prescribe gave APNs more flexibility in choosing appropriate treat- ments for patients. ftis has been particularly important in the primary care setting.
Collaborative Formulary
More flexible than the established formulary and, to a certain extent, more flexible than a negative formulary, a collaborative formulary allows the APN to create a formulary most useful to their practice in collaboration



with an identified physician who serves as a collaborator. Although this has worked well in some states, in others, where the formulary must be shared with the regulatory board, it has sometimes become a problem. Require- ments regarding information to be included in formu- laries and the updating of formularies can be, to say the least, cumbersome and obstructive.
Open Formulary
fte most flexible and most popular framework for pre- scriptive authority is the open formulary, in which APNs have no limitations regarding what they can prescribe. In these cases, APNs prescribe according to their own specialty scope of practice, just as physicians prescribe within their own scope of specialty practice. fte major- ity of states that have implemented this framework in their regulations have done so without difficulty or neg- ative repercussion. Overall, the trend toward the removal of barriers to prescribing has resulted in the removal of limitations of drugs to be prescribed and the requirement for physician collaboration to do so. Although barriers in a few states still exist in the authorization to prescribe controlled substances, the limitations of authorization to prescribe legend drugs have disappeared.

The APN–Physician Relationship in Statute and Regulation
fte requirement for APNs to have some sort of col- laborative arrangement with physicians to prescribe is often coupled with the prescriptive-authority patterns discussed previously. Whereas most states do not require formal collaborative arrangements with physicians, the remainder have some requirement for collaborative or supervisory agreements with physicians to practice or prescribe medication. ftese arrangements range from identifying a consulting physician to submission of a written agreement to the regulatory board(s) for filing or consulting relationship in statute or administrative rule (American College of Nurse-Midwives [ACNM], 2016b). CRNAs have supervising or cooperating phy- sicians in most states (AANA, 2016), whereas CNSs, in the states in which they have prescriptive authority, tend to have the same requirements as NPs (NCSBN, 2016). Some of these requirements stem from a desire on the part of legislators or other interested and influential

parties for physician oversight to prescribe; others have been driven by reimbursement laws and policy that call for physician oversight of APNs. Sometimes rules are made for APNs that reflect the supervisory relationship required of physician assistants (PAs) without consider- ing the fact that APNs are accountable under their own license, carry their own liability insurance, and in the majority of states are not required to be supervised by physicians, as are PAs.

BARRIERS TO PRESCRIPTIVE PRACTICE


fte road traveled by APNs to obtain prescriptive author- ity has not been without struggle. ftere is no denying that the majority of barriers to practice have roots in organized lobbying by certain parts of the medical com- munity to limit the autonomy of APNs. ftis move has often been couched in the language of “protecting public safety.” fterefore, some legislators and governors have seen fit to set limitations in statutes and administrative rules governing APNs. However, the literature is replete with studies that report on the clinical safety of APNs. In these studies, patient safety has been found to be as high with APNs as with physicians and often has been found to be higher with APNs than with physicians (Brown & Grimes, 1995; Laurant et al., 2005; Office of Technol- ogy Assessment [OTA], 1986). Ratings on quality of care have also been consistently high. APNs, particularly NPs, have been studied and scrutinized with consistently positive reports for many years (AANP, 2020).
fte biggest barriers to practice for all groups have
been the limitations set in state statutes and regulations. Of those, the requirements for formalized agreements with physicians to prescribe or practice have created the most frustrating barrier. ftis has been particularly true for NPs and CNMs who, to practice and receive reim- bursement, must find physicians who will agree to serve as collaborators. CRNAs, particularly in rural areas, suf- fer from similar problems.
   Once a physician has agreed to serve as a consultant, both the advanced practice registered nurse (APRN) and physician often find the reporting rules to be frus- tratingly cumbersome. Although it now occurs infre- quently, requirements to list types of patients who may be seen, consultation patterns to be maintained, types



of drugs to be prescribed, and identification of physi- cians to serve as backup in the absence of the identified collaborating physician still sometimes plague APNs. Although, generally speaking, pharmacists have been cooperative and NPs report a good working relation- ship with pharmacists, issues such as continued use of the collaborating physician name as the prescriber on a medicine bottle label and requests for the name of the “supervising physician” before dispensing a prescription have frustrated APNs, physicians, and patients through the years. fte requirement of a Drug Enforcement Ad- ministration (DEA) number by insurance companies to pay for prescriptions is still problematic at times. ftis problem lands on the pharmacists’ doorstep when they cannot obtain reimbursement for dispensed drugs from insurance companies without an accompanying DEA number. Although this practice is a misuse of the DEA number, which is to be used for the prescription of con- trolled drugs only, it has become common practice for insurance companies and pharmacies to use this number as an identifier because of its uniformity for physician identification throughout the country.
Mail-order pharmacies have sometimes created bar-
riers for APNs. Occasionally, patients cannot obtain prescriptions from these entities without the name or signature of a physician. Although this is no longer a problem with most mail-order pharmacies, those with warehouses located in states where laws or policies for this form of dispensing require the order of a physician still occasionally pose difficulties for patients with pre- scriptions written by APNs.
   Confusion about the role and scope of practice of an APN through the grouping of NPs, CNMs, and PAs as “midlevel practitioners” has also created problems for APNs. It is often assumed that the required supervisory arrangements for PAs is the same for NPs and CNMs, so that policies related to practice, including prescrip- tive authority and ordering of medications for patients, are often based on the statutes and rules governing PAs rather than APNs. Because most regulation of PAs stems from a state’s medical practice act, insurance companies, institutions, accreditation entities, and pharmaceutical companies sometimes assume that the PA administra- tive rules apply to APNs and do not seek information from a state’s nursing practice act and supporting regu- lations. Because APNs are authorized to practice more

autonomously than PAs in most instances, this assump- tion and the actions taken based on it create barriers for the APRN, particularly in relation to prescribing controlled drugs.

PRESCRIBING PATTERNS


fte AANP has conducted several national surveys that examined the prescribing patterns of NPs throughout the United States (Goolsby, 2005, 2009; Hudspeth & Klein, 2019; Klein & Lugo, 2018; Towers, 1989, 1999a, 1999b). ftose studies found that an NP’s prescription patterns reflected the specialty and the practice setting of the NP.
   Drugs most frequently prescribed by all specialties in these studies were antimicrobials, anti-inflammatories, and analgesics. Antihypertensives, bronchodilators, and cardiovascular drugs were prescribed most frequently by adult, family, and gerontological NPs. Contraceptives were most often prescribed by women’s health NPs. fte vast majority of NPs practicing in emergency depart- ment settings prescribe analgesics, anti-inflammatories, and antimicrobials most often; and in the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) hospital setting, the vast major- ity of NPs prescribe antihypertensives and cardiovascular drugs most frequently, followed by diabetic medications, gastrointestinal medications, and analgesics. Among NPs authorized to prescribe controlled drugs, the major- ity of adult, family, gerontological, and psychiatric and mental health NPs prescribe them at least once a week with the highest percentages being in the hospital and VA hospital setting.
CNM prescriptive activities center on  medications
needed for prenatal care, such as vitamins, and intra- partum and postpartum care, such as analgesics. In ad- dition, their prescribing practices are similar to those of  women’s  health  NPs.  ftey  include  contraceptives and other hormone therapies; vaginal preparations; and antimicrobials as well as anti-inflammatories, an- algesics, and vitamin therapies (Towers, 1999a). fte CNSs who most often prescribe medications are the psychiatric and mental health specialists. In a study conducted by Talley and Richens (2001), psychiat- ric and mental health CNSs authorized to prescribe controlled drugs were reported to most frequently



prescribe antidepressants (selective serotonin uptake inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants). fte next most frequently prescribed medications were antiparkinso- nian drugs and antihistamines for neuroleptic side ef- fects and sleep, followed by mood stabilizers such as lithium and carbamazepine.
   Among CNSs of other specialties, prescribing activities appear to function around already diagnosed conditions and altering, adjusting, or refilling physician-prescribed medications in stable patients. fte lack of authorization and the desire to maintain autonomy in nursing practice led many CNSs to choose not to obtain authorization in settings in which such authorization is attainable. fte po- sition of the NACNS is that CNS prescriptive authority should be optional and that when prescribing is to be un- dertaken, the CNS should meet the requirements of any other APN (Lyon & Minarik, 2001; NACNS, 2005).

THE FUTURE FOR APN PRESCRIBING

Authorizing APNs to prescribe medications is no longer a controversial issue; however, obsolete statutes and reg- ulations still need to be changed in some states to guar- antee the unencumbered ability for APNs to prescribe needed medications for all patients. Toward this end, two important documents have been developed that reinforce the authorization of APNs to function at their full educa- tional scope, which includes unrestricted prescriptive au- thority. fte APRN Consensus Model (2016), endorsed by 46 states and 48 national nursing organizations, pro- vides recommendations for the education and certifica- tion of APNs (NCSBN, 2008). Likewise, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) report, The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health (2011), reinforces the need for APNs to be authorized to practice to the full extent of their education and training. Both documents reflect the culmination of the APN’s evolution to full prescriptive authority that generally exists today.

SUMMARY


Prescriptive authority is now generally recognized as an integral part of advanced practice nursing. Although to- tally unfettered authority by all APNs has not yet been achieved, the experience of prescribing medications for patients under the care of these providers has been found to be safe and beneficial. fte arguments put forth to limit their prescribing activities grow weaker with each advance that APNs make. fte practicality, the en- hancement of quality of care, and the cost-effectiveness of the practice of these groups has enhanced the logic and desirability of giving prescriptive authority to APNs nationwide.

















Credentialing and Clinical Privileges for the Advanced Practice Nurse
Ann H. Cary and Mary C. Smolenski



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Describe the purpose of credentialing for providers, institutions, regulators, and the public.
• Acknowledge the Consensus Model for APRN Regulation: Licensure, Accreditation,
Certification and Education (LACE).
• Explain the federal and state regulatory impact on the processes of credentialing and privileging required by institutional providers and payers.
• Justify the direct relationship between the processes and documents required for
the APN credentialing process and the decisions for scope of practice or clinical privileges made by the employing institution.
• Discuss the unique aspects of credentialing and privileging in telehealth and tele-
medicine as well as during disasters.
• Justify the creation and maintenance of the APN portfolio as a documentary tool for use in credentialing.
• Discuss challenges that the APN may experience related to the changing nature of
institutional and regulatory requirements.



113



INTRODUCTION

Credentialing and privileging of health-care providers, and advanced practice nurses (APNs) in particular, is the initial and ongoing mechanism employed by regulatory and voluntary oversight and delivery systems to ensure protection of the public and quality patient care during the delivery of health-care services. fte Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (Fauteux et al., 2017) defines cre- dentialing as the process by which health-care organiza- tions or insurers determine an APN’s qualifications to provide and/or be reimbursed for health-care services.
  fte independence and autonomy of APN services necessitates the same degree of attention to the processes of credentialing and privileging as is accorded to physi- cians and other providers. fte process is a critical dimen- sion of any risk-management plan and is reflected in the level of responsibility assumed by the governing board, medical staff organization, and top administrator of the institution. APNs are increasingly being granted privi- leges in acute care and community settings and partici- pate in provider networks as primary care and specialty practitioners. In some states, APNs are eligible to bill as primary care providers (Center for Advancing Provider Practices, 2016).
Six purposes frame the concept of credentialing: certi-
fication of providers, verification of provider credentials, establishment of practice privileges, and accreditation of institutions (adapted from Cary, 2017):
1. Public protection
2. Quality assurance and risk management
3. Consumer information and choice
4. Competitive advantage
5. Economic advantage
6. Employment of health professionals in declared emergencies
fte Institute of Medicine’s (2011) Future of Nurs- ing: Leading Change, Advancing Health has challenged nursing and society “to allow nurses to practice to the full extent of their education and training” (p. 4). Rec- ommendation #1 asserts that in order to master this challenge, barriers to the scope of practice as detected by actions in Congress, state legislatures, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), the Fed- eral Trade Commission (FTC), and the Department of

Justice (DOJ) must be removed. In addition, organi- zational barriers of the APN employer may be equally oppressive to those at the macro level. APNs who expe- rience these barriers often encounter them during the process of credentialing and as an outcome of the privi- leging process. Credentialing and privileging restrictions have a dramatic and common impact on APNs’ ability to execute to their full scope of practice. fte American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) issued a warning that unnecessary restrictions deny the public access to af- fordable high-quality care provided by APNs (Campaign for Action, 2020).
For more than a decade there has been a plan
and model to remove barriers to APN practice with the issuance of the Campaign for APRN Consensus: Model for Uniform National Advanced Practice Reg- istered Nurse Regulation (National Council for State Boards of Nursing [NCSBN], 2008). In addition, credentialing and privileging processes for providers issued by the CMS and fte Joint Commission (TJC) have changed over the years. fte Consensus Model for APRN Regulation: Licensure, Accreditation, Certifica- tion and Education (NCSBN, 2008), or LACE model, promotes uniformity of national standards and reg- ulation by the states to promote mobility of APNs and access to APN care. fte APRN Regulatory Model includes (p. 7):
• Licensure: fte granting of authority to practice
• Accreditation: Formal review and approval by a rec- ognized agency of educational degree or certification programs in nursing or nursing-related programs
• Certification: fte formal recognition of knowledge, skills, and experience demonstrated by the achieve- ment of standards identified by the profession
• Education: fte formal preparation of APNs in gradu- ate or postgraduate programs
Because credentialing verification includes the educa- tion, certification, and licensure of the APN and accred- itation of the educational institution from which the APN graduated, the LACE model under consideration by the states for uniform APN preparation and creden- tialing, once executed, can reduce barriers to practice. Each state board with jurisdiction over education and practice will need to adopt the LACE approach in or- der to foster a standard approach to APN education,



certification, and practice regulation. fte impact of full implementation of the LACE model will simplify the credentialing process for both the APN and the em- ployer. Most states have adopted some aspects of LACE, but it is far from fully implemented to date. fte reader can access the model and its explanation at https://www
.ncsbn.org.
   To ensure consistency of standards and processes for providers, both the CMS and TJC have undergone regulatory changes related to the issuance of uniform processes and allowances for the credentialing and privileging of medical professionals, including licensed independent practitioners (LIPs), and allied health professionals, including APNs and physician assistants (PAs). Although an institution can be more restrictive in privileging, it cannot be less restrictive than the CMS Conditions of Participation (CoP). Because the CMS no longer recognizes an equivalent process for creden- tialing and privileging of certain providers who provide a “medical level of care,” APNs providing this level of care must now be processed through the medical staff standards process at the institution or system. ftis process includes verification of credentials and creden- tialing process, recommendations of the medical staff, approval of the institutional governing body, and imple- mentation of review performance processes such as the initial focused professional practice evaluation (FPPE) and ongoing professional practice evaluation (OPPE). If the APN does not provide a “medical level of care,” they can be processed through an “equivalent” process (Cheung, 2011). Privileges are typically extended for 2 years with few state exceptions, and thereafter a renewal process is required.
ftis chapter discusses credentialing and privileging as
separate mechanisms with the understanding that analysis of the data about the application process of credentialing is a precursor to the decision about the nature of activities (specific procedures or treatment of specific conditions) for which privileging will be awarded (Pelletier, 2015). Issues related to credentialing and privileging for APNs within the health-care arena are also presented. fte reader is ad- vised to pay attention to new developments in these ar- eas because barriers to executing full scope of practice for APNs appear to be rapidly changing in federal and state regulations as well as in voluntary, employer, and provider groups.

CREDENTIALING


fte prelude to any discussion on credentialing is grounded in the fact that the graduating APN today must have an earned graduate degree or postgradu- ate coursework in the additional area of focus once a graduate degree is conferred. fte institution conferring the degree must be accredited by a regional accredi- tor of higher education and, in most cases, a nursing accrediting organization recognized by the U.S. De- partment of Education. Once a student graduates having met all educational requirements—master’s, post- master’s, or doctoral program—for preparing the grad- uate, they must achieve a passing score on the certifica- tion examination.
Certification confers the initial, specific voluntary
credential for the APN. ftere is yet to be uniformity among the states as to whether an additional regulatory (nonvoluntary) credential process is required to practice in a particular state based on the certification credential, such as obtaining a second state license as an APN. fte value of the LACE model described earlier is to regulate uniformly how nurses and educational institutions are credentialed based on a national standard and how these are recognized as equivalent among the states. However, the LACE model has not yet been adopted by the ma- jority of states. Renewal of APN certification, for all ex- cept the certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA), is conferred by a combination of practice hours, continuing education, and/or academic coursework in accordance with the requirements of the respective (re)certifying organization.
fte current model, structure, and process of recerti-
fication for CRNAs was initiated on August 1, 2016, by the National Board of Certification and Recertification for Nurse Anesthetists (NBCRNA), the Continued Pro- fessional Certification program (CPC). ftis was updated in 2020. ftis shift in recertification requirements was driven by the expectation of consumers for the measure- ment of continuing competency in the recertification of health-care providers and may well portend a shift in the recertification process of all APNs in the future. To obtain the most current information about the process and the phased timeline for the CRNA certification and CPC program access http://nbcrna.com/certification. Box 7.1 lists the certification organizations for APNs.





Organizations Offering Certification
     and Recertification for APNs
American Academy of Nurse Practitioners Certifi- cation Programs (AANPCP)
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses Certification Corporation (AACN Cert Corp) American Midwifery Certification Board (AMCB)
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC)
National Board of Certification & Recertification for Nurse Anesthetists (NBCRNA)
National Certification Corporation (NCC) Pediatric Nursing Certification Board (PNCB)
   Credentialing involves the collection, verification, and assessment of information determining the eli- gibility and qualifications of the provider to provide health-care services and to receive reimbursement and includes current licensure and certification; education and training; and experience, ability, and current com- petence to perform the work (TJC, 2020). “Who-what- where” privileging decisions are based on the initial and ongoing evaluation of the applicant’s credentials and performance competencies. fte credentialing process it- self guarantees the integrity of the data and serves as the basis for decisions regarding privileging authorization for scope of practice and appointment of the APN in a fa- cility or system.
fte types of data gathered during the credentialing
process are directed by federal and state regulations; pro- fessional standards; facility requirements, policies, and procedures; and voluntary oversight bodies. Medicare CoP guide federal and many state-regulated processes; standards of practice guide the professional standards; institutional bylaws, policies, and procedures mandate the specific application of the credentialing and privileg- ing processes for the employed, independent contractor, or LIP; and voluntary or semi-regulatory accreditation standards mandate the institutional processes. At a min- imum, TJC standards require credentialing and privileg- ing of all LIPs and APNs who deliver a “medical level of care” and who are permitted by law and the organiza- tional bylaws to provide patient care without supervision

or direction (Pelletier, 2015). Regardless of the partic- ulars of data required to support the APN application, there are common data elements that the applicant can expect to see.

Credentialing Application and Procurement of Data: Preapplication and Application
Data and documents required by APNs to support the application for appointment or reappointment to a clin- ical position fall into several general categories. Box 7.2 lists the common categories included in the credentialing application process. Organizations may use a two-step process for credentialing: preapplication and applica- tion. A preapplication typically addresses any disci- plinary actions or sanctions by regulatory or professional organizations; current unrestricted license; criminal



Categories of Data Required for Credentialing ApplicationPersonal and practice demographic information Legible copies of education and training Clinical performance
Work history Current CV
State(s)licensurehistory(includingstate-controlled substance licenses)
Certifications
Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) certificates Provider number or ID
Criminal background report
Liability insurance and claims history
History of sanctions and penalties imposed on practice and voluntary relinquishment of li- censes and certifications
Disclosures of physical, mental, substance, or criminal problems
Attestation of information completeness and accuracy
Authorizing statement to collect any information necessary to verify application


history; board certification; clinical specialty require- ments; and health status information compliant with the American Disabilities Act (Nationalcredentialing
.com, 2020).
   A written application must be submitted to the au- thorized department or person in an institution. fte application may be lengthy, and completeness and ac- curacy of information are critical to ensure timeliness of processing. Review of the application examines both the submission of information by the APN and source verification as well as consistency of information among all sources. Any gaps or inconsistencies in information are further investigated by the institution before a deci- sion is made for appointment. fte APN is responsible for adding information as needed and answering queries about incomplete or inconsistent data. In circumstances where changes in status occur (e.g., licensure renewal, registration, additional education and certifications, re- certification, voluntary or involuntary termination of staff membership, reduction or loss of privileges), the provider is obligated to submit the pertinent informa- tion to the credentialing body immediately for review of appointment status. Falsification of information or intentional omission of information on the application may be grounds for termination of the process, disci- plinary action, or dismissal. If credentialing is denied, this is typically reported to the National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) (Pelletier, 2015). For APNs working in managed care organizations (MCOs), credentialing for most health plans is largely conducted by a vendor such as the Council for Affordable Quality Healthcare, Inc. (CAQH) (Buppert, 2018).

Verification of Advanced Practice Nurse Application Data
Two types of verification of data sources, primary and secondary, are conducted on an application in accor- dance with the rules and regulations of the account- able body for credentialing within the institution and as directed by the institutional accreditation process. Primary source verification attests to the accuracy and authenticity of the APN’s credentials based on evidence obtained from any source issuing the credential or the at- testation of clinical performance. Examples include veri- fication of licensure by state agency and certifications by

certifying bodies, letters by authorized personnel at the professional school, letters from individuals personally acquainted with the APN’s skills, and database queries. Secondary source verification relies on verification ac- tions of the APN credentials based on data obtained by means other than direct contact with the issuing source of the credential (Utilization Review Accreditation Commission [URAC], 2011, 2016). Examples include unofficial copies of documents or reports on patient sat- isfaction statistics by the applicant. It can also include peer references or quality data information from past employer organizations.
Some credentialing processes allow for documenta-
tion secured by Internet or telephone verification. State nursing licensure boards are continuing to evolve tech- nologically, and many have online license verification processes such as Nursys. In addition, some health-care institutions contract with credentialing verification or- ganizations (CVOs) to collect the primary and second- ary data on which the decision for appointment will be made. For example, the CAQH has more than 1.3 mil- lion physicians and other health-care professionals en- gaged in CAQH ProView™, an online Universal Provider Datasource (UPD) that allows providers to self-report updates in credentials to a database that can be accessed by employers (CAQH, 2020). fte institution contract- ing with any CVO is responsible for monitoring the quality of service provided by the CVO and may require the CVO to be accredited by one of the national accred- iting bodies such as the URAC. fte institution is not relieved of liability resulting from decisions based on contracted CVO data and processes for credentialing of APNs. In addition, the institution remains accountable for the accreditation standards issued by its accreditation bodies such as TJC.

Analysis of Credentialing Application
Upon completion of the APN application review and verification processes, the final step is the institutional decision on the appointment. ftis is guided by institu- tional policies and procedures related to structure of the decision-making body; roles of the members; risk man- agement and legal reviews; due-process mechanisms; documentation requirements for decisions; and report- ing mechanisms to the institutional board of directors,



clinical directors, and the applicant. In some institu- tions, the human resources department processes the data for credentialing, whereas in other institutions cer- tain providers are credentialed by the medical staff. One organizational model at the University of Rochester, fte Margaret D. Sovie Center for Advanced Practice, serves as a collection center for the core APN functions related to regulation, institutional requirements, and credentialing for its APNs. For more information on the Sovie Center, visit http://www.urmc.rochester.edu
/strong-nursing/sovie-center.
   In most institutions, the credentialing committee is composed of physicians. As more APNs become creden- tialed, their representation on medical staff committees will need to be embraced and the bylaws adjusted to ex- pand governance for APNs to serve on provider panels and teams. fte credentialing process is time-consuming because of the importance of adhering to principles of good data integrity and decision making. Credentialing for insurance carriers may have added timelines. For these payers, it can often take up to 120 days to complete the process for each payor (Nationalcredentialing.com, 2020). It behooves the APN to obtain a copy of the policy and procedures for the credentialing process, a commit- tee member list, a schedule of meetings, the anticipated action on the application, and any due-process mecha- nisms. Rapid responses to queries facilitate the comple- tion of data collection and decision making. Also, alerting primary sources of the impending request by the verifica- tion body can facilitate timely responses for information. When a credentialing process results in an appoint- ment to the staff, the length of appointment and reap- pointment procedures are guided by institutional policy. It is wise to obtain copies of the reappointment process and criteria and continuously compile the necessary ev- idence to meet the criteria for reappointment. As new technologies and procedures become common, the APN needs to understand the minimum criteria for creden- tialing in new procedures and specialties and maintain
documentation accordingly.
   Decisions for emergency credentialing of volunteer LIPs have been revisited since 2002 because of national and local emergencies. For example, in 2002 and af- firmed in 2020, TJC created a standard that allows the institutional chief executive officer, medical staff presi- dent, or their designee to grant emergency privileges

when an emergency management plan has been acti- vated. Implications for credentialing focus on data in- tegrity: acceptable sources of identification, including a current license to practice, current hospital identification with the license number, or verification of identity by a current hospital or medical staff member. Temporary privileges can be granted to fulfill an important patient care, treatment, and service need or when an applicant for new privileges with complete applications with no concerns is awaiting review and approval by the Med- ical Executive Committee. ftis guidance is found in the Medical Staff Chapter of the current The Joint Com- mission Emergency Management (EM) and Medical Staff (MS) Standards for Providers. Time limitations for emer- gency and temporary privileges are always imposed for credentialing providers in this status. An emergency or disaster declaration to secure provider services remotely during the COVID-19 pandemic served to clarify that if the LIP is delivering the same services through telehealth that they are credentialed and privileged to provide prior to the declaration of disaster privileging, no additional credentialing is required (TJC EM.02.02.13) (fte Joint Commission, 2020).

Organizational Standards for Credentialing Advanced Practice Nurses in Institutions
APN practices can be found in almost all venues of health-care delivery. Appointment and privileging over- sight mandates from credentialing organizations have broadened the standards to include LIPs in hospitals, ambulatory care organizations, subacute long-term care, hospice, mental health, and MCOs regardless of prac- tice structures. Credentialing for other delivery systems is on the horizon. Because the standards of sponsoring organizations can change annually, the reader is advised to consult the many Web sites related to these topics to obtain the most current information possible on stan- dards for accreditation as they relate to credentialing and privileging of practice.
Once the application for credentialing is approved,
a subsequent decision is made by the institution to au- thorize the specific practice activities (privileges) of the APN. In some instances, a separate privileging applica- tion is required. Consult institutional policies for the respective procedures.



PRIVILEGING

Once a process used to “award” physicians the right to admit patients to and perform clinical activities within a hospital, privileging is now a process faced by many APNs as they apply for positions within health-care fa- cilities, MCOs, mental health and substance abuse treat- ment facilities, and even doctors’ offices (if the APN will be following private patients in the acute care setting). Privileging is used by a facility or employing organization to authorize a provider’s specific scope of patient care ser- vices that are consistent with an evaluation of the pro- vider’s clinical qualifications and performance for specific diagnostic or therapeutic services within well-defined limits. fte granting of privileges is based on the follow- ing factors: state practice acts, agency regulations, licen- sure, education, training, experience, competence, health status, and judgment. It should be noted that just be- cause the state practice act authorizes a particular activity (e.g., prescribing narcotics), a particular institution may be more restrictive and may not allow this privilege or may require a secondary signature by a physician.

Rationale and Background
Privileging is a component of the credentialing process of health-care facilities. As mentioned previously, na- tional accrediting bodies such as the URAC, the Na- tional Committee for Quality Assurance, TJC, and the Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Care establish both the credentialing and privileging standards and pro- cesses by which organizations are accredited. In the early 1980s, TJC (then, the Joint Commission on the Accred- itation of Healthcare Organizations [JCAHO]) revised its definition of medical staff and broadened the scope of practice rules to include permissive language that allowed hospitals to include other licensed individuals (permit- ted by law and by the hospital) to provide patient care services independently in the hospital. ftese privileges usually include clinical and admitting practices. TJC also established a mechanism to monitor these privileges and charged the hospitals to establish criteria for clini- cal privileging and a process to ensure that competent individuals were providing patient care. Some facilities may have a list of “core privileges” that are appropriate for a particular type of provider or specialty practice. For

example, HCPro provides sample core privilege forms that facilities can use for APNs in dermatology practices and emergency departments, nurse practitioners (NPs) in acute care, clinical nurse specialists (CNSs) in psy- chiatric mental health, and certified nurse midwives (CNMs) (HCPro, 2016b). TJC is not prescriptive as to what process should be used for privileging, nor does it endorse or devalue the use of “laundry lists” or core priv- ileges. However, the use of TJC standards indicates that the facility does indeed evaluate whether individuals are qualified and competent to perform the privileges they are granted by the process (TJC, 2020).
fte TJC standards address the issue of hospital priv-
ileging. fte standards speak to the process itself and to the mechanisms that must be in place, executed, and outlined in the hospital bylaws. ftese processes must in- clude the time frames, the appeals processes, criteria for appointment and determining specific privileges, those responsible for the credentialing and privileging process, the reappointment process, temporary privileging, tele- medicine privileges, disaster privileges, and the quality improvement process.
ftose who provide “medical level of care” must use the medical staff process for credentialing and privi- leging, making all [medical staff] standards applicable (including recommendation by the organized medi- cal staff and approval by the governing body, OPPE, and FPPE). APRNs and PAs who provide “medical level of care” must be credentialed and privileged through the medical staff standards process. APRNs and PAs who do not provide “medical level of care” utilize the human resources “equivalent” process de- tailed by the Joint Commission. With the rise of ER medical providers and hospitalists, the roles of phy- sicians and LIPs for hospital admitting privileges has drastically waned. (Mumper, 2019)
One area of credentialing and privileging approved by the CMS concerns the approval of TJC’s requirements for telemedicine practitioners in hospitals and critical access hospitals as published in the 2012 Update 1 to the Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals and the Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Criti- cal Access Hospitals. ftese standards appear as Standard LD.04.03.09 and MS.13.01.01 (fte Joint Commission Perspectives, 2012). Several areas bear attention (fte



Joint Commission Perspectives, 2012): fte originating site (where the patient is located) must have a written agreement with the distant site (where the provider is lo- cated) ensuring compliance with Medicare CoP related to credentialing and privileging of providers. fte gov- erning body of the originating site grants privileges to a distant site independent practitioner based on the orig- inating site’s medical staff recommendations, which rely on documentation provided from the distant site if that site is a Joint Commission–accredited organization. fte distant site practitioner must hold an active license that is issued and recognized by the state in which the patient is receiving the telemedicine services. fte originating site collects evidence of internal review of a practitioner’s performance of the privileges and sends this information to the distant site to assess quality of care, treatment, and services. Such information includes documented adverse outcomes related to sentinel events as well as complaints by patients, providers, and staff at the originating site.
In the case of a disaster, an APN may be granted
disaster privileges through a modified process. ftis process is typically granted for two conditions: when a disaster-management plan has been activated and when the organization is unable to meet immediate patient care needs. At a minimum, verification of license and oversight of care treatment and services must be pro- vided (TJC, 2017).
   Continuing education is also mandated in TJC stan- dards, as are four core criteria: current licensure, relevant training or experience, current competence, and ability to perform privileges requested.
   Six areas of competence inform the evaluation of a practitioner in TJC standards for the credentialing and privileging process. ftese are:
1. Patient care
2. Medical and clinical knowledge
3. Practice-based learning and improvement
4. Interpersonal and communication skills
5. Professionalism
6. System-based practice
In addition to incorporating the aforementioned con- cepts into the overall evaluation of an individual’s creden- tialing and privileging file, two other processes also allow for closer evaluation. fte first is FPPE. As specified in TJC Standard MS.08, the FPPE is implemented for all initially requested privileges, using performance criteria

to judge competency. It can be subsequently used via a performance monitoring process when patient safety is- sues concerning competency, behavior, and ability to per- form are documented. fte second process is the OPPE; it supports an evidence-based approach to maintain creden- tialing and any decision to maintain, revise, or revoke ex- isting privileges. Hospitals use a variety of approaches to assess APN competency, including physician review, peer review, focused case review, direct observation, coworker review, charts and documentation, and simulation testing (Center for Advancing Provider Practices, 2016). APNs are subject to the credentialing, privileging, and monitor- ing processes, as are physicians, in accordance with appli- cable bylaws, rules, and regulations using the providers’ scope of license and related standards.
When the process is done correctly, credentialing
and privileging provide protection for the facility, the patient, and the practitioner. fte process decreases risk for the facility and the practitioner by ensuring that the practitioners providing care to patients are currently li- censed, have been educated for the role in which they are working, and are safe and competent in the scope of care they are authorized to provide. fte intent is that patients ultimately benefit from well-educated, safe, competent practitioners. fte process in an accredited organization also provides some security for the practitioner because federal law regarding participation in Medicare requires that staff membership and professional privileges in a hospital are not dependent solely on certification, fel- lowship, or membership in a specialty body or society (42 C.F.R. 482.12 (a)7) (Buppert, 2018). TJC also spells out that an appeals process must be in place if privileges are denied. fte process provides for time frames and feedback to the practitioner and provides mechanisms for temporary or emergency privileging. Finally, privileg- ing provides data for determining the economic effect of provider practice on the health-care system.
As stated in the definition, there are several factors
that affect the outcome of privileging: state practice acts, agency regulations, license, education, training, experi- ence, competence, health status, judgment, the culture of the medical staff, and the medical staff’s bylaws. fte factor that affects APNs most is the scope of practice outlined in the state practice act for the state of licen- sure and authorization. Each state continues to regulate the practice of APNs differently at this time (although it may dramatically change with full implementation of



the Consensus Model), and the scope of practice out- lined in state regulations or statutes can be broad or nar- row. Some practice acts define what APNs can do and what specific drugs they may or may not prescribe if they have prescriptive authority. fte health-care agency regulations for credentialing and privileging are usually defined by the medical staff and hospital board and may restrict APNs from performing certain procedures. fte license and authority to practice as an APN is tied to scope of practice issues outlined in each state practice act. Education provides the theoretical and experiential components to develop specific outcome competencies (as determined by the professional organization and the profession in scope and standards of practice). For exam- ple, the outcome competencies for a pediatric NP would not be the same as those for a geriatric NP, although there may be some overlapping competencies.
It is important to document education, training, and
experience as practitioners progress in their careers be- cause not everything essential for practice can be learned in the formal education process. A professional port- folio is essential to establish and maintain. However, just because a practitioner learned a procedure does not mean that he or she is legally allowed to perform it because the procedure may be outside the scope of practice and license. Health requirements (both physical and mental) are evaluated and certain restrictions may apply. Untreated substance abuse problems and physi- cal impairments may interfere with the performance of a particular role. Competence and judgment become a little more subjective when evaluating and reviewing a privileging file. Many of the components of the provider file are taken into consideration when making an over- all determination of competence and judgment, and the credentialing panel may want to establish a period of ob- servation and performance evaluation.

Process
fterapeutic and diagnostic patient care services that fall under the privileging framework are usually defined by the particular medical or surgical specialty area within the health-care facility, and criteria are established that outline safe practice. Delineation of the specific types of privileges may be presented in a variety of ways, and each facility may have its own guide of core privileges. Among the basic types of approaches are the following: category,

“laundry list,” severity or complexity of care, and hybrid form. fte first, category, usually defines privileges along specialty lines and can vary significantly across types of specialty programs because of curriculum. fte listing of privileges and skills, or the laundry list approach, is used mainly for procedures and is less appropriate when specific diseases are referenced because of the vari- ability of presentation. For example, the University of Mississippi provides a privilege request form (https:// www.umc.edu/Medical%20Staff%20Services/files/ahp-
--acnp-core-privileges-form.pdf), last updated in 2016, with a wide range of privileges that can be requested by the acute care nurse practitioner (ACNP). ftey range from insertion of arterial lines to proctoscopic proce- dures to paracentesis.
   fte listing of privileges by severity or complexity usually has more to do with the type of patients and those procedures and skills needed to care for them rather than the type of provider (e.g., gerontological nurse practitioner [GNP], ACNP). A hybrid form is some combination of the forms, such as a laundry list for ACNPs along with particular patient profile needs. Of course, many factors affect which form will/can be used, and some privileging may be dependent on pro- tocols and additional training, hence the hybrid nature. fte credentialing panel or peer review panel who reviews the credentialing files may also determine the applicant’s privileges, or there may be a separate panel composed of members, including peers, from the par- ticular service or area. fte ideal panel includes an inter- disciplinary group with APNs represented. ftis group determines if a candidate applying for privileges meets the criteria based on the information submitted in his or her credentialing package and application. ftey may al- low the practitioner independent privileges or supervised privileges, depending on the evaluation. Other strategies that provide support for the credentialing and privileg- ing of APNs besides representation on the credentialing panel include representation in the development of any policies and procedures relevant to the process and com- munication networks for periodic updates on changes or alterations in APN credentialing and privileging prac- tices. Leadership roles of advanced practice providers and opportunities and considerations for hospitals are dis- cussed in an online hospital review article (Bean, 2018). Accreditation requires that the privileges and cre- dentials files be reviewed every 2 years at a minimum to



ensure currency and competence. However, clinical privi- leges are reviewed, revised, or updated for a variety of rea- sons other than at the time of reappointment. Evaluations of performance may warrant privileges being expanded or reduced. Nonuse of privileges may indicate that spe- cific privileges are no longer needed, and competency cannot be maintained. Finally, as technology and inno- vation transform hospital procedures and the treatment of various diseases, the scope of privileges also changes. Privileging is an ongoing process; new privileges may be added, and some may be removed based on performance.
   Temporary privileging may need to occur from time to time when a particular provider becomes ill or dis- abled, necessitating that another provider be recognized to take over certain duties of care. Recently recruited providers whose skills are specialized and needed in the facility may be awarded temporary privileges while the formal process of credentialing continues. ftese priv- ileges are time limited, and primary source verifica- tion of licensure and competence are allowed through phone calls until the full credentialing process occurs. By proclamation of executive order, processes such as these were used during the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic. Health-care providers were recruited and volunteered to go to the New York area from other states to as- sist the local care providers (http://www.op.nysed.gov
/COVID-19_EO.html#).
   fte NPDB serves an important role in the credential- ing process. fte NPDB Public Use Data File contains selected variables from medical malpractice payment and adverse licensure, clinical privileges, professional society membership, and Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) reports (adverse actions) concerning physicians, dentists, and other licensed health-care practitioners and is updated four times annually. It also includes reports of Medicare and Medicaid exclusion actions taken by the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Office of Inspector General (Health Resources and Ser- vices Administration [HRSA], 2020; NPDB, 2020).
However, the issue of incidents not being reported
to the NPDB still remains a barrier to comprehensive access to provider performance. Clearly multiple meth- ods of data access and analysis are needed to achieve the goals of any credentialing and privileging system, and the use of the NPDB is an essential component of data on credentialing of APNs.

THE PROFESSIONAL CAREER PORTFOLIO


Portfolios continue to play a role in the world of compe- tence assessment. Portfolios are used in a variety of ways by facilities, regulators, nursing organizations, certifying bodies, and educational institutions. Hospitals use them for evaluation and career ladder programs. Regulatory agencies use them for assuring the public that practi- tioners are competent. Dietitians use them for their recertification processes. Certifying bodies use them for recertification or reactivation of credentials. Edu- cational institutions use them for advanced placement of RNs into bachelor of science and graduate programs and for compiling clinical practice evidence for doctoral projects. Professional career portfolios serve as the foun- dation of the credentialing and privileging application process used in today’s health-care system.
Evidence-based practice provides a scientific, jus-
tifiable rationale for patient care therapeutics, whereas “practice-based evidence” provides a rationale for autho- rizing a practitioner to perform specific patient care ther- apeutics. Documentation of this practice-based evidence provides the information needed for making decisions regarding the privileging component of the credentialing process as currently outlined.
   Tracking the events in our own lives becomes more and more complex, even though one would think it should be easier with all the technology available. As we add new experiences and roles to enrich our profes- sional careers, work with new practitioners in a variety of settings, learn new skills, and pursue a path of lifelong learning, it becomes more and more imperative to docu- ment where and when we did what and where and when we learned what from whom. Establishing a professional credentialing portfolio as one begins advanced practice education and/or a career can make the credentialing and privileging process easier and save time and money. It may even assist the APN to be more adequately com- pensated by allowing them to achieve a higher status within a health-care facility because of practice-based evidence. fte credentialing and privileging portfolio de- scribed here can build on this process.
An online portfolio is an excellent way to build a pro-
fessional career history that can serve multiple purposes, including the credentialing and privileging process. fte CAQH UPD (http://www.caqh.org) provides one



example of a provider database, CAQH ProView, that can help health-care organizations and providers main- tain accurate provider information. Registering with  a database such as UPD is free for providers. Licenses, certificates, transcripts, and documents can be scanned or uploaded to the online portfolio, eliminating the need for paper copies. Although some of the materials collected during the student educational process (course syllabi, clinical logs, reflections) may not seem pertinent for the professional career portfolio, it is easy to archive these data through an online portfolio, making them available at a later time only if necessary. It is better to collect more information and not use it than to need it and not have it. Individuals can access their files anytime, anywhere with Internet access. Fear of misplacing docu- ments or having them destroyed by unforeseen natural disasters (e.g., floods, hurricanes, or fires) can be elimi- nated. Stronger security of online materials has resulted from files that can be password protected. In addition, a compilation of documents can be sent to credentialing committees via e-mail, or they may be provided Internet access to them. Updates can be added to the portfolio as new knowledge and skills are acquired, making the port- folio a living document. For those who are “Internet- phobic,” the same documents can be stored on a flash drive in Word or pdf format, carried place to place, and updated when needed. Just be sure to purchase a flash drive with enough memory to store all current data and with room to spare for updates.
fte purpose for which a portfolio is used determines
the elements it should contain. Although many of the components are similar across portfolio types, some things are unique to the credentialing and privileging portfolio. fte following format is suggested for devel- oping the professional career portfolio. ftis portfolio is composed of four major components: (1) the practi- tioner contact information page; (2) the practice-based evidence component used to assist in determining spe- cific privileges; (3) the credentials component section; and (4) the attestation page.

Practitioner Contact Information
An introductory page with the practitioner’s name, ad- dress, contact information, identity, and photo (if de- sired) is included.

Practice-Based Evidence Component
ftis component provides evidence to support the six ar- eas of general competencies being evaluated during the hospital credentialing process and includes aspects of pa- tient care, medical and clinical knowledge, practice-based learning and improvement, interpersonal and communi- cation skills, professionalism, and system-based practice. fte practice-based evidence component should include the following:
1. Copy of the state practice act governing scope of practice in the state of licensure
2. Core competencies for the APN specialty
3. A sampling of references on the cost-effectiveness and quality of care provided by APNs
4. Copies of all job descriptions, especially where clin- ical privileges were awarded
5. Specialty procedures or processes learned and verified:
a. In the educational process
b. On the job
c. ftrough continuing education
(Fig. 7.1 shows a sample verification form, which could be used to validate these procedures.)
6. Letters of support and verification of practice com- petence in the areas outlined; include both peers and supervisors or employers
7. Transition programs or internships, if any, post- graduation with dates
8. Employment history, identifying significant responsibilities
9. Any performance outcome data that may have been collected at places of employment (e.g., number of patients seen per day, revenue generated, patient satisfaction)
10. Copy of the Consensus Document

Credentials Component
fte credentials component should include the following: (Note the expiration dates of any licenses, certifications, and other information, and add these dates to your calendar.)
1. Education (transcripts and diplomas)
2. Military history (if any)
3. Licenses (numbers and expiration dates or copies)



Provider Name: Specialty:
License Number and Certiftcation:

Date(s) of performance  	 Procedure(s) or activity:



Description/elaboration:




Veriftcation:





I, the undersigned, have observed

(name)


and can verify that

he/she can safely perform the above outlined procedure(s) independently/with supervision (circle one).
Provider/verifter:		 Title:		 License:		 Facility:		 Address:   	




Phone:  	


Email: 	


Date:  	


Figure 7.1 Sample Verification of Practice Form.



4. Certification(s) (national role specialty and subspe- cialty, if applicable)
5. Additional certification(s) (e.g., advanced cardiac life support [ACLS], basic cardiac life support [BLS], pediatric advanced life support [PALS], ad- vanced trauma course)
6. DEA and Medicaid numbers
7. National Provider Identifier (NPI) number
8. Insurance coverage and any liability history
9. Immunizations and dates
10. Languages spoken, written, and understood (iden- tify beginning, average, or advanced levels)
11. Research in progress or completed
12. Publications
13. Continuing education (no more than 5 years’ worth or length of certification)
14. Professional organization membership and offices held in those organizations
15. References (professional and personal)
16. Certified Background Report results
17. Any previous denials of hospital credentialing or privileging

Attestation Page
fte final page, or the fourth component, should include a statement that is signed and dated by the provider at- testing to the information contained in the portfolio. ftis should be updated every 2 years or more often as any changes occur, as should the entire portfolio.
Sample
I, 	, attest to the authenticity of the information contained in this portfolio and verify that I am in good health and able to perform the clinical privileges I am requesting. I permit the employer or gaining party of this portfolio to verify any of the information provided if necessary.
Signed 	Date  	

CHALLENGES TO FULL SCOPE OF PRACTICE

Although APNs are joining the staff of various facilities in greater numbers, there remain challenges to APNs utilizing

their full scope of practice in clinical settings. fte list of is- sues presented here is not exhaustive but rather provides a springboard for discussion and solution generation.
   All 50 states currently address advanced practice in public policy in some manner. For the most part, state boards of nursing hold authority over advanced practice. Where the prescription of medications is a sanctioned ac- tivity, additional education in advanced pharmacology is required. By this arrangement, many state boards of nurs- ing have deferred to the profession’s right to recognize its specialists through certification and to develop and promulgate the standards of practice on which advanced practice registered nurse (APRN) certification is based.

Maintaining Data on Clinical and Administrative Performance
APNs are held to standards of performance that include clinical practice and administrative standards. Both have economic implications for decisions to appoint or re- appoint APNs to an institutional staff. fte institution may find that clinical performance falls outside estab- lished benchmarks if patients under the APN’s care have excessive lengths of stay, repeated and lengthy delays in appointments, quality-of-care issues, and additional exposure to liability resulting from variation in perfor- mance. Patient satisfaction scores may be easily tied to performance. Institutions will need to more closely track coding practices of APNs in order to capture both the actual practice and subsequent outcomes. Without such data and analysis, performance cannot be understood or managed in ways comparable with other providers.
APNs are wise to monitor their performance against
the targets of the organization and colleagues and to use the feedback to initiate personal or systems-wide performance improvement strategies. Maintaining documentation of outputs and accomplishments, pa- tient acknowledgments, and cost savings are important assets for the APN’s portfolio. It is also important to be aware of the information and reference data about activities that are required to be verified as part of the credentialing process. Losing track of certification and licensure renewals has immediate repercussions for the credentialing process. Determining the accu- racy of any inputs into the NPDB or other databases is important to verify before an institutional query



occurs. Opportunities to correct information are less stressful when the APN is not abutting an institutional deadline.

Decreasing Barriers to Continuity of Care
Although the numbers of APNs holding hospital privi- leges has accelerated—41.7% of 290,000 NPs had hos- pital privileges in 2019 (American Association of Nurse Practitioners [AANP], 2019)—even more APNs obtain- ing privileges will help improve continuity of patient care. Why would that be so? One reason for obtaining privileges is that some insurance companies and MCOs require their primary care provider (PCPs, or in this case APNs) to hold hospital privileges as a prerequisite to cre- dentialing and billing or receiving payment. fte other reason is that a PCP who does not have privileges within a hospital cannot review the chart or care provided for a patient once that patient is admitted to the hospital un- less there is a Health Insurance Portability and Account- ability Act (HIPAA) release. Although the provider may make a friendly visit and ask questions of the patient, the PCP cannot validate or follow the treatment, tests, and outcomes in the patient record. It is important that the patient and/or their family allow access to the PCP if they are not the admitting provider. Complicating factors in- clude Medicare CoP for reimbursement, hospital bylaws, and insurance reimbursement requirements.
Being the provider of record and, in many cases the
one who will eventually continue to follow that patient upon discharge, would make the transition from hospital back to the community a much more seamless process. ftis is especially important for independent NPs, who carry their own panel of patients. It would be wise for in- dependent practice NPs to apply for admitting privileges at their local hospital or, at the least, clinical privileges. ftis situation is also complicated by the fact that hos- pitals may not notify APNs when one of their patients is admitted. ftey may not identify the APN as the pro- vider of record either, partly because of lower reimburse- ment levels for the hospital. It is important to emphasize to both the patient and their family that they must in- form hospital staff if admitted and to notify the APN of the admission. If the whole process is more transparent and collaborative and the provider can “hit the ground running” when the patient is once again placed in their

care, the patient will be the one who benefits (Brassard & Smolenski, 2011). Although this situation is changing with the increasing number of APNs holding privileges, there is still much variation depending on the particular hospital, its medical staff and bylaws, its acceptance of APNs, insurance company requirements, and state and federal laws.

Managed Care Panels
Health-care providers work in a competitive environ- ment where more than one type of provider may be able to provide the same scope of practice or provide partial activities within another scope of practice. fte ability to be credentialed and to apply for legal scope of practice privileges rests in the hands of the credentialing struc- ture. Professional medical societies are flush with com- plaints from physicians who perceive that they have been excluded from MCO provider panels, and these exclu- sions present a glass ceiling for APNs as well.
   Sometimes, the exclusion of APNs is because of lack of knowledge concerning the full scope of prac- tice parameters; at other times, there is a perception of anticompetitiveness or restraint-of-trade action (Fauteux et al., 2017). APNs are well advised to pro- vide documentation about their performance out- comes compared with those of other providers using evidence-based reports, articles, and quality reports, es- pecially ones published in the provider’s representative journals. Seeking advocates and allies at the institution to which the APN is applying can assist in the politics of selection for worthy candidates. Where warranted, legal consultation may prove helpful to understand the issues and the APN’s rights.
Another issue intertwined with managed care panels
is reimbursement. Medicaid managed care in particular becomes challenging when (a) state laws affect recogni- tion of NPs as PCPs; (b) federal Medicaid law permits pediatric and family NPs to be used in primary care management but does not require it; and (c) the law is silent regarding the inclusion of these providers in Med- icaid managed care provider panels. Whether NPs, who serve more than half of all Medicaid beneficiaries, can be designated PCPs in MCOs is dependent on states’ policy choices and individual MCO credentialing policies (Van Vleet & Paradise, 2015).



Credentialing of the APN Across Multiple Organizations
When working in a health-care system or between two or more entities, the APN may be confronted with replication of the credentialing application process for each entity. ftis can be extremely time-consuming and result in lost oppor- tunities. It is important to gather perceptions from other providers and administrators about expectations and rami- fications for productivity given duplication in processing of multiple credentialing applications. Create a solution team to construct alternative approaches to reduce redundancy and be prepared to gather support from colleagues on al- ternative proposals to present to the governing board. As discussed previously, maintaining an online professional portfolio will also help. Providers are reminded quarterly to update their information and attest to its accuracy. Other regulations and organizations are on the horizon to limit redundancy in credentialing and privileging and to stream- line the business of health care. Consulting the CMS rules and regulations intermittently can facilitate your ability to meet the changes in processes in a timely manner.

Uniform Adoption of the Consensus Model for APN Regulation
fte number of states adopting all the components of the APRN Consensus Model document is still low. However, it is difficult to evaluate because there are multiple components that must be addressed to fully comply and many require legislative change. fte NCSBN has been tracking states by component and scoring each state as it reaches compliance. In general, the NCSBN is tracking recognition of all four roles, graduate education, national certification, and uniform titling (APRN). (See the maps on the NCSBN Web site at https://www.ncsbn.org for the latest details.) Currently, credentialing requirements for APNs vary among states as to the mechanism for title protection and scope of practice differences. fte NCSBN pro- posed that it was appropriate for APNs to be legally regulated through a second license for their role and population focus because their activities are complex and involve role and population competencies, in- dependence, and autonomy (NCSBN, 2008). Most state models now require an application, RN licensure,

completion of a graduate degree with a major in nurs- ing (or a graduate degree with a concentration in the advanced nursing practice category), and professional certification from a board-approved national certifying body. Graduate education includes the doctorate of nursing practice (DNP) degree. Adoption of the Con- sensus Model (NCSBN, 2008) allows the APN role and population focus to be regulated at the state level and the specialization focus to be credentialed by specialty organizations rather than by state licensure.

APN Representation on the Medical Staff and Adjusting Bylaws
As APN privileging becomes more common, APNs should seek governance representation on the medical staff and ensure that the medical staff bylaws embrace full representation. ftis is a slow process and varies across hospitals and institutions. Early on in Ellenville Regional Hospital in New York, an APRN, Bob Donaldson, was in- vited to review and revise the medical staff bylaws; he was ultimately elected president of the medical staff in 2009 with another NP serving as secretary of the medical board (Hendren, 2011; http://www.ellenvilleregional.org). He currently still holds that position in 2020 (D’Arrigio, 2016, LinkedIn profile April 2020). As privileging of APNs grows, more will assume positions and contribute to the leadership of institutional privileging. Other advanced practitioners hold leadership positions where they coor- dinate providers in large medical centers across multiple campuses supporting and sometimes supervising residents as part of the team (Beresford, 2016). Having a seat at the table on credentialing and medical boards is critical.
Mackenzie Bean, in his article “APPs in Leadership Roles:
Key Opportunities and Considerations for Hospitals,” dis- cusses the dramatic increase in the number of advanced practice providers (APPs) compared to physicians and the growing number of leadership roles that APPs are assuming. He states, “Hospitals and health systems can be proactive by updating bylaws and ensuring regulatory compliance to achieve a smooth transition for APPs stepping into medical staff leadership roles. While these efforts can prove compli- cated and time-consuming, implementing proper protocols and regulatory considerations will translate into greater suc- cess for APPs on the medical staff and, ultimately, greater efficiency for hospitals and health systems” (Bean, 2018).



POST-PANDEMIC STICKINESS

During the COVID-19 pandemic, many of the rules and regulations for credentialing and privileging were waived and temporary conditions/waivers were put in place to accommodate dealing with the crisis in an expeditious manner. Providers were overworked, provider replace- ments were limited, and patients were encouraged to stay home. Waivers for credentialing, expedited privileg- ing when providers were limited, cross border practice, the explosion of telehealth practices (even though tele- health had been around for some time), and exceptions for payment of services are some examples of practices that may lead to a different approach in the future.
As an example, in March 2020, the Coronavirus
Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropria- tions Act was signed into law by President Trump. ftis act included a provision allowing the secretary of the DHHS to waive certain Medicare telehealth payment requirements during the public health emergency (PHE) declared by the secretary of the DHHS on January 31, 2020. ftis act allowed beneficiaries in all areas of the country to receive telehealth services, including in their homes. Previously, telehealth delivery was restricted only to patients in rural areas, and the venue where the pa- tient received the services could not be their home. fte removal of these two general-access barriers to telehealth along with the waiver of providing telehealth only to patients who had a “prior established relationship” with a particular practitioner allowed new patients to access telehealth services (CMS, 2020).
It will be interesting to follow these changes to iden-
tify which, if any, will stick. Will the evidence demon- strate that they were the correct changes and should be continued? Will changes in practice and payment impact the future practice of APNs? Will the outcomes drive more states to pass legislation allowing APNs full prac- tice authority?

SUMMARY

It is clear that credentialing and privileging are import- ant and necessary processes that are also time-consuming, complex, frequently changing, and influenced by multiple

factors. Institutions can leverage privileges as a gate or a bridge to allow greater access to quality APN care. ftese processes have a significant impact on both the scope of practice and the economic status of the practitioner. As you think about eventual changes in credentialing and privileging, be aware that no change is insignificant. Each change has personal ramifications, implications for the profession, and an impact on care for patients and com- munities. It is always wise to follow the dialogue and plan around national regulatory initiatives that will direct your scope of practice.

















The Kaleidoscope of Collaborative Practice
Alice F. Kuehn and Patricia Murphy



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Summarize the history of physician–nurse and nurse–nurse changing relationships and collaborative efforts.
• Describe the myriad aspects of collaborative practice.
• Distinguish between multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, intradisciplinary, and transdisciplinary practices.
• Identify the status of collaboration in each of the four advanced practice nurse
(APN) roles.
• Describe a framework for collaboration (concept and components).
• Explain the historic and current barriers to health professional collaboration.
• Propose strategies for developing a successful collaborative team.
• Compare the traditional and emerging collaborative practice models, in- cluding Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs), medical homes, Shared Decision-Making (SDM), and the patient navigator.








129



fte future of nursing and health care depends on part- nership. One of the four key messages of the Institute of Medicine (IOM) report on the future of nursing states that “nurses should be full partners with physicians and other health professionals in redesigning health care in the United States” (2011, p. 7). As a follow-up to the 2011 report, in 2015 the Robert Wood Johnson Foun- dation (RWJF) released the report, “Assessing Progress on the Institute of Medicine Report: fte Future of Nursing,” which states that the campaign had made sig- nificant progress in a short period but points out that barriers still exist and more work needs to be done.
fte adoption of the advanced practice  registered
nurse (APRN) Consensus Model (APRN Joint Dialogue Group, 2008, 2020) is identified as a key factor in reg- ulatory change, noting that the resulting consistency in regulation of advanced practice nursing across states is facilitating steady progress in legislative reform (Pearson, 2011; Phillips, 2020) ftere is an excellent discussion of the Consensus Model in Chapter 10 (Onieal, 2018). fte National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) is a resource for current implementation data of the Consensus Model (NCSBN, 2020). LACE (licensure, accreditation, certification and education) is the imple- mentation mechanism for the APRN Consensus Model. In Phillips’s 2020 report, although 23 states, two ter- ritories plus the District of Columbia (DC) now allow for full scope of practice (SOP) for some categories of APNs, 27 states still require some sort of agreement for prescribing medications/medical devices, making refer- rals, or operating in general full scope of practice (Peterson, 2017). In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, more than 20 states issued emergency orders to suspend or waive existing practice constraints including physician agreements/joint protocols for the duration of the pan- demic (AANP, 2019). Phillips noted that there were “significant state legislative accomplishments in the areas of APRN practice authority, reimbursement, and pre- scriptive authority associated with COVID-19. Excep- tional progress continues through strong and successful partnerships made possible by APRN professional asso- ciations, Boards of Nursing (BON), and the Future of Nursing: Campaign for Action” (p. 21). Current trends in health care reflect an ever-increasing call for collabo- ration, consensus building, coordinated care, and shared decision making (SDM) as new models of care delivery

such as medical homes, nurse-managed clinics, and ac- countable care organizations (ACOs) continue to emerge (American Nurses Association [ANA], 2010b; Haney, 2010; Hughes, 2011; McCarter et al., 2016; Rice et al., 2010). In the ANA’s Social Policy statement, collabora- tion is described as a partnership in which all partners are valued for their expertise, power, and distinct areas of practice. fte statement also acknowledges their shared areas of practice and mutual goals and emphasizes that the “nursing profession is particularly focused on estab- lishing effective working relationships and collaborative efforts essential to accomplishing its health-oriented mission” (ANA, 2010b, p. 7).
fte role of the APN has evolved along a continuum
of collaborative interactive models of increasing com- plexity (Kuehn, 1998). Just as a kaleidoscope creates a constantly changing set of colors and patterns, collabora- tion is a constantly changing aspect of health-care prac- tice, moving from little interest to a great demand, from frustration to success, and sometimes back again. fte interactions among members of a health-care team pres- ent a new picture each time the group, situation, time, or environment changes. ftis chapter reviews the history and examines myriad aspects of collaborative practice. It compares and contrasts multidisciplinary, interdisciplin- ary, intradisciplinary, and transdisciplinary practices, us- ing examples to clarify the distinctions and similarities. fte values and strategies by which collaborative practice is being developed as well as barriers to that development are presented, and the continuing and expanding evolu- tions of collaborative practice models are examined.

A HISTORY OF CHANGING RELATIONSHIPS


Our world continues to change so rapidly that change itself has become the constant. ftis sense of change in every aspect of life was described by Alvin Toffler in his classic 1970 publication Future Shock, a term he created to describe the “shattering stress and disorientation” re- sulting from too much change too quickly. Our response to change has historically been slower than the change itself. However, with today’s rapidly increasing pace of change, the lag between the change and our response is growing; and this is what Senge (1994) calls future shock.



Much of our human behavior flows from our ability to embrace or to fight the pace of life. Ours is a world of transience: a series of short-term relationships with peo- ple, things, places, workplaces, and information itself. In a situation in which the duration of relationships has been shortened, our sense of reality and of commitment and our ability to cope are seriously challenged. fte flow of change is not linear, and we are being forced to adjust to novel situations for which we have not been prepared. Because we are living in a health-care world demanding collaboration, cost-effectiveness, and high-quality care, the relationships among professionals are rapidly chang- ing, demanding flexibility and collegiality. A key rec- ommendation of the IOM report Keeping Patients Safe: Transforming the Work Environment of Nurses (2004) was for health-care institutions to move away from a hierar- chal approach to shared decision making and increased support of interdisciplinary collaboration. fte RWJF follow-up report identified progress but acknowledged that there was still much work to be done (RWJF, 2015). It should be noted here that the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) introduced in 2010 has had a major impact on the manner of health-care deliv- ery today and continues to influence the development of new, more collaborative models of care. However, although the PPACA supports efforts to increase the number of APNs, there remain challenges to the delivery of care by APNs because of continuing inconsistencies between federal and state policies resulting in practice restrictions (Carthon & Sarik, 2015).

Physician–Nurse Relationships Over Time
In 1859, Florence Nightingale described the role of nursing as a specific set of relationships to medicine and hospital administration set within the social structure of the times. Placing the nurse as a care provider subservi- ent to the physician established and formalized a role structure that, after nearly 150 years, continues to define society’s general sense of the nurse role as under the au- thority of the physician (Partin, 2009; Workman, 1986). A statement issued at the 2009 American Medical As- sociation (AMA) House of Delegates meeting support- ing this hierarchical role structure called for physician supervision of nurses, noting that the nurse role, even though it is important, must be supervised. fte nursing

response drafted by the ANA and some APN organiza- tions stressed that the concept of physician supervision of APNs is out of date, is inappropriate, and creates a major barrier to the access of care (Partin, 2009; Sorrel, 2009). fte challenges physicians face in understanding, supporting, and embracing the reality of the advanced practice role is a result of “cognitive dissonance,” a rejec- tion or denial of information that challenges their pre- conceptions of the nurse role.
   In examining the historical roots of collaborative experiences between physician and nurse, the years be- tween 1873 and the 20th century saw the relationship of nurse to physician become situated primarily within a hospital setting. fte triad of physician–nurse–hospital superintendent never truly evolved in equilibrium, as the Nightingale model had envisioned, because the sce- nario of a nursing superintendent reporting separately to the hospital trustees challenged the deference given to physicians and administrators in practice and would have undermined both their authority and the use of student nurses as workers. fte ongoing development of hierarchical relationships within the hospital between physicians, nurses, and administrators resulted also from changes occurring in nursing itself. Nursing sought to gain more professional status through a rigid hierarchi- cal management style of its own within a continuing hospital attitude of paternalism (Markowitz & Rosner, 1979; Reverby, 1979, 1987). Collaborative relationships with physicians, hospitals, and foundations serving the health-care system began to develop during and follow- ing the Great Depression as evidenced by the follow- ing: medical society participation in the Committee on Nursing of the Association of American Medical Col- leges as they endorsed the Committee on the Grading of Nursing Schools; a manual on hospital nursing service administration, sponsored by the American Hospital As- sociation (AHA) and the National League for Nursing Education (NLNE), published in 1935; and a survey of nursing schools in psychiatric hospitals under the aus- pices of a joint committee approach by the American Psychiatric Association (APA) and the NLNE. It should be noted, however, that these examples are not of in- dividual collaborative relationships but of organizations and were tenuous at best; the medical society withdrew from the Committee on Nursing shortly after their en- dorsement (Roberts, 1959).



  fte ANA code of 1950 spelled out a relationship of nurse to physician as a complex mix of dependent and independent responsibilities. Roberts (1959) stated, “fte nurse is obligated to carry out the physician’s or- ders intelligently, to avoid misunderstandings or inaccu- racies by verifying orders, and to refuse to participate in unethical procedures” (p. 563). However, if every nurs- ing decision made must come from within the orders flowing from another profession, the relationship cannot be collaboration but instead becomes supervised delega- tion. Kinlein (1977) identified the dilemma in nursing as a blockage of the ability of nurses to initiate nursing diagnoses, design nursing care, or establish a distinctive practice when the power of the medical judgment is the prime source of all decision making regarding pa- tient care. Nursing judgments thus become delegated medical judgments because they are aimed at a medical goal and have to agree with that goal. Kinlein describes an example of a physician snatching a chart from her hands while she was teaching a student regarding a treat- ment regimen. fte doctor stated, “What are you doing, talking about that? ftat’s none of your concern. Just teach those students to give bedpans and then to remove them” (1977, p. 30), leaving both nurse faculty and stu- dent to conclude that either the nurse has to learn more and become a doctor or learn less so that they are pre- pared merely to carry out orders. In this situation, Kin- lein notes, the nurse was expecting the physician to be knowledgeable, the patient expected both physician and nurse to be knowledgeable, and the physician expected the nurse to have no knowledge. ftis is an unacceptable situation, as well as a clear example of noncollaborative, unidisciplinary practice, with no communication be- tween the two sets of providers except through a hierar- chical, supervisory relationship.
fte current system of care delivery has been described
as supporting professional individualism and separatism of roles, often resulting in defensiveness, lack of continu- ity, competition, redundancy, excessive costs, fragmenta- tion, little cooperation or teamwork, grossly inadequate and outdated systems of communication, and underuti- lization of APNs (Fischman, 2002; IOM, 2011; Norsen et al., 1995; O’Neil & Pew Health Professions Com- mission, 1998; Spitrey, 2016). However, calls for collab- orative practice have continued to grow and intensify, requiring physicians, nurses, and all health  professionals

to begin working through the relationship-building pro- cess required to establish a collaborative team approach. Pearson (2011) noted that “the irony of our continuing struggle with organized medicine is that, even while we fight against medicine’s inappropriate domination over our practice, we must maintain and enhance our work- ing relationship with individual physicians, for patients are best served when providers work together” (p. 22). ftis requires a team effort within an environment of mutual respect and valuing of each professional’s role. As Cooper reminded us, “Ultimately, the success of each discipline will be judged by how effectively it participates in a continuum of care that meets the needs of patients and of the health care system overall” (2001, p. 58).
“fte credible evidence showing that collaboration
improves health care outcomes for patients entreats the two professions to put cooperation before professional roles” (Phillips et al., p. 1325). An increasing number of health-care studies continue to affirm the need for and value of collaboration, emphasizing that efficient delivery and high quality of care may depend on the level of collaboration among professional care providers (Donald et al., 2009; Hojat et al., 2003; Hughes, 2011; Rice et al., 2010; Zwarenstein & Bryant, 2000). Maier and Aiken (2016), in examining the expanding clini- cal roles for the nurse globally, noted that the “focus of research and policy debate in the U.S. is shifting away from whether APRN-provided care is safe, to how to re- duce barriers to practice and maximize access for those most in need” (p. 2, italics added).

Status of Collaborative Practice in Advanced Practice Roles
fte growth and acceptance of the APN role has hinged on the willingness of the profession to acknowledge and sup- port the role; provide advanced education and experience; and promote a clarity of role that facilitates development of a sense of identity and clear understanding by other disciplines, policymakers and legislators, and the public. As each of the four APN practices—certified registered nurse anesthetists (CRNAs), certified nurse-midwives (CNMs), clinical nurse specialists (CNSs), and nurse practitioners (NPs)—has moved toward autonomy in practice, establishing positive relationships with the med- ical community has been key. Stanley (2005, p. 34) notes



that “consumer satisfaction and physician advocacy have proved to be powerful stimuli” for operationalizing the APN role. Applying Benner’s (1984) competencies and domains of nursing practice from novice to expert lev- els to advanced practice, Fenton and Brykczynski (1993) identified additional domains and competencies and verified the high level of expertise of APNs. However, the SOP flowing from this model of expertise needs to be clearly identified. It is critical for the practice of all APNs, while maintaining clinical practice distinctions, to be conceptually united, stressing commonalities while ac- knowledging differences in practice patterns but promot- ing an interdisciplinary focus in their practice (Stanley, 2005). Once the role is clarified, SOPs delineated, common practice elements of APNs made known, and support from professional colleagues and consumers on- going, the challenges faced in establishing collaborative practice will be greatly minimized. ftis is the hope of the APRN Consensus Model (APRN Joint Dialogue Group, 2008; Onieal, 2021). Without these foundational com- ponents, the challenges of creating truly functional teams will continue to be significant. fte following section provides a brief overview of role-development challenges, achievements, and approaches to collaboration for each of the four APN practices as well as three additional pro- vider roles affecting primary care delivery: the PA, the pharmacist, and the “patient navigator.”
The Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist (CRNA)
Clarity of role and a reach for autonomous practice were forged early in the development of nurse anesthetists. In a study of surgeon–nurse anesthetist collaboration in surgery between 1889 and 1950, Koch (2015) noted that the success of nurses in anesthesia duty during the Civil War led to the formal collaboration between nurses and surgeons at the Mayo Clinic and the beginning of a long and continuing surgeon–nurse collaboration that helped advance surgery in the United States. Alice Magaw, a pioneer in the field who worked at the Mayo Clinic in the early 1900s, supported the separation of nurse anesthesia from nursing service administration, emphasizing its need for recognition and requirements for specialized education. During World War II, the role was identified as a clinical nursing specialty within the military field; and in 1945 a formal national certifica- tion process was established. fte SOP of the CRNA was

revised and approved by the Board of AANA in February 2020. It states that the CRNA is a “licensed indepen- dent practitioner who plans and delivers anesthesia, pain management and related care to patients of all health complexities across the lifespan. As autonomous health professionals, CRNAs collaborate with the patient and a variety of healthcare professionals in order to provide patient-centered high quality, holistic, evidence based and cost-effective care” (American Association of Nurse Anesthetists [AANA], 2020).
   Some states use the term collaboration to define a re- lationship in which each party is responsible for his or her field of expertise while maintaining open commu- nication on anesthetic techniques. Other states require the consent or order of a physician or other qualified licensed provider to administer the anesthetic. fte Cen- ters for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) initially required physician supervision for nurse anesthetist ser- vices to Medicare patients. However, in late 2001, a rule published in the Federal Register allowed a state to be exempt from this physician-supervision requirement for nurse anesthetists after appropriate approval by the governor. By 2017, 17 states and Guam had opted out of this federal requirement (AANA, 2020). In addition, the CMS removed the restriction on CRNAs during the 2020 pandemic. It is important to collect clinical data during this time. ftat data can be used to support re- moving the restriction permanently (AANP, 2020). Jones and Fitzpatrick (2009) identified four possible types of current inpatient anesthesia team arrangements in the United States: an all-anesthesiologist staff, an all-nurse anesthetist staff, a mixed staff of the previous two, and a team of anesthesiologist and anesthesiolo- gist assistants (p. 431). In their study of collaboration among members of these teams, they found satisfaction with collaboration expressed by both nurse anesthetists and physicians. However, they noted that there are still issues with role conflict; unclear expectations and limits on SOP with mixed teams; and a component of exclu- sion from hospital, departmental, and anesthesia group responsibilities when only physicians can participate in hospital committees or represent the group. fte chal- lenge for CRNAs is to work with physician colleagues to achieve fullness of practice for each member of the anesthesia team while working together to continue the advancement of surgery (Koch, 2015).



The Certified Nurse-Midwife (CNM)
In the colonial and pioneer history of the United States, midwives were respected members of both settler and Native American communities. However, since the early 1900s, the role has had a stormy history caused in no small part by the low status of women, sparse education, religious intolerance, and increased domination of phy- sician obstetricians with the movement toward birthing in hospitals. In 1921, the Maternity Center Association of New York and the Henry Street Visiting Nurse Associ- ation proposed establishing a school of nurse-midwifery. However, strong opposition from medicine, nursing, and the public arose, mainly because of a generally held negative view of the role of midwife as an exemplar of inadequacy, little education, and social incompetence. In 1925, the role moved to a new level of recognition and respect with the inauguration of the Appalachian clinics of Kentucky (Frontier Nursing Service) by Mary Breck- enridge (Dorroh & Norton, 1996).
fte number of CNMs has increased from just 275
in 1963 to more than 4,000 by 1995 and 11,194 in
2020 (AANP, 2020). CNMs consider interdisciplinary practice as a sine qua non of their practice, and this po- sition has been affirmed in their standards of care and formal definitions of practice (American College of Nurse-Midwives [ACNM]/American College of Obste- tricians and Gynecologists [ACOG], 2018). In 1971, the ACNM, the ACOG, and the Nurses Association of the ACOG issued a joint statement supporting the concept of obstetrical team practice. However, the teams were to be “directed by a physician,” formalizing a hierarchical practice pattern that posed challenges to development of a collaborative approach to practice (Bigbee, 1996). fte need for collaboration is indicated by the health status of the client rather than by statute or edict. However, the number of viable practices currently differs considerably state by state because of legal and legislative requirements for collaboration and the parameters of required collab- orative practice protocols, which vary from state to state. Because of lack of support from physicians and hospitals, CNMs are often unable to practice or their practice is severely limited because of economic com- petition and differing views on the meaning and value of collaboration. A study from New Zealand offers a model of midwifery care in which midwifery-led mater- nity care is the dominant model and 75% of women in

New Zealand choose a midwife as their “lead maternity caregiver” (LMC). When midwives did refer to an obste- trician, 74% indicated that they continued providing care in collaboration with the obstetrician and the relation- ships between professionals were satisfying (Skinner & Foureur, 2010).
  fte issue of economic competition is a hindrance to CNM practice. Another economic factor threatening the future of the collaborative relationship is malprac- tice insurance cost. For example, in a discussion with one CNM/physician practice group, the CNMs noted that the cost of malpractice insurance increased from
$18,000 to $40,000 during 1 year, and their practice group could not afford to cover the additional costs. In- dividual CNMs did not get paid for all the calls they took, nor were they able to attend enough births to cover the cost of their own insurance. ftis inequity of practice compensation coupled with the lack of 100% support of a practice by their physician group resulted in the mid- wives no longer practicing midwifery but being limited to providing other women’s health services.
   In 2018 the joint statement from the ACOG and ACNM was revised and reaffirmed for the sixth time in 32 years. Here is the statement in full:

fte American College of Obstetricians and Gynecol- ogists (ACOG) and the American College of Nurse Midwives (ACNM) affirm our shared goal of safe women’s health care in the United States through the promotion of evidence-based models provided by obstetricians-gynecologists (ob-gyns), certified nurse-midwives (CNMs), and certified midwives (CMs). ACOG and ACNM believe health care is most effective when it occurs in a system that facili- tates communication across care settings and among clinicians. Ob/gyns and CNMs/CMs are experts in their respective fields of practice and are educated, trained, and licensed independent clinicians who collaborate depending on the needs of their patients. ftese clinicians practice to the full extent of their education, training, experience, and licensure and support team-based care. ACOG and ACNM advo- cate for health care policies that ensure access to ap- propriate levels of care for all women. Quality of care is enhanced by collegial relationships characterized by mutual respect and trust; professional responsibility



and accountability; and national uniformity in full practice authority and licensure across all states.
   Shortages and maldistribution of maternity care clinicians cause serious public health concerns for women, children, and families. Ob-gyns and CNMs/CMs working together optimize women’s health care. ACOG and ACNM recommend in- creasing the number of ob-gyns and CNMs/CMs, utilizing inter-professional education to promote collaboration and team-based care.
   Recognizing the high level of responsibility that ob- gyns and CNMs/CMs assume when providing care to women, ACOG and ACNM affirm their commitment to promote the highest standards for education, national professional certification, and recertification of their re- spective members and to support evidence-based prac- tice. Accredited education and professional certification preceding licensure are essential to ensure skilled pro- viders at all levels of care across the United States.
   ACOG and ACNM recognize the importance of options and preferences of women in their health care. Ob-gyns and CNMs/CMs work in a variety of settings including private practice, community health facilities, clinics, and hospitals.
   Establishing and sustaining viable practices that can provide broad services to women requires that ob- gyns and CNM/CMs have access to affordable profes- sional liability insurance coverage, hospital privileges, equivalent reimbursement from private payers and under government programs, and support services in- cluding, but not limited to laboratory, obstetrical im- aging, and anesthesia. To provide highest quality and seamless care, ob-gyns and CNMs/CMs should have access to a system of care that fosters collaboration among licensed, independent providers. (ACNM/ ACOG, 2018)
ftis revised statement is more reflective of the current status of each profession as well as contemporary realities within the women’s health-care system. fte simplicity of the statement was perhaps its greatest asset. By not dic- tating specific protocols or responsibilities, professional accountability is placed where it rightfully belongs: “on each respective profession and the individual women’s health care professional.” fte most recent joint statement of the ACNM and ACOG alliance in 2018 reaffirms

their shared goals regarding women’s health and contin- ues its simplicity of language and approach, emphasizing the need for a health-care system that facilitates commu- nication and fosters collaboration among providers and across settings (ACNM/ACOG, 2018). fte evidence provided by the American Midwifery Certification Board noting that nearly 50% of recent CNM/CM graduates were providing some primary care services either inde- pendently or collaboratively stresses the continuing need for developing collaborative approaches in the practice setting as well as for greater clarity of SOP (Phillippi & Barger, 2015).

The Clinical Nurse Specialist (CNS)
fte CNS role, which originated in the late 1930s, was formalized as a nurse-clinician to be prepared in graduate nursing programs. Its emergence represented a major shift of focus in graduate education from the choice of a functional role of primarily teacher or ad- ministrator to the selection of a clinical specialization in practice. Of the multiple specialties represented by the CNS role, psychiatry was the first to move to graduate education and is among the most highly re- spected. Some have attested that collaborative activities with physicians seemed to come more naturally for this group because of their graduate-level education, which allowed CNSs and physicians to more readily relate to each other as peers (Bigbee, 1996). A review of literature published between 1990 and 2008 on care provided by CNSs supports their value in acute care settings in reducing length of stay, cost, and rates of complications (Newhouse et al., 2011). fte latest data on CNSs is that more than 72,000 CNSs practice in hospitals, clinics, home care, nursing homes, and in- dependent practice (National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists [NACNS], 2020).
Key elements of CNS practice identified by the Amer-
ican Association of Critical-Care Nurses (AACN, 2007) include “collaborating with other disciplines to provide interdisciplinary best practices” (p. 7). Collaboration is one of the eight CNS competencies considered essential for nurses providing care in the acute care setting. ftese competencies are part of the AACN synergy model for patient care, recommended as a guide for clinical practice in acute care. fte model is predicated on the fact that



patient outcomes are optimal when patient characteris- tics and nurse competencies are in sync (Kaplow, 2007). One CNS described her collaborative practice level as a real partnership with a great deal of mutual caring and respect between providers. Each partner grounded in- teractions in self-confidence and personal mastery, and they planned together “always.” Yet another CNS noted that her collaborating physicians needed some educa- tion on what the CNS could and could not do, but they learned as they jointly practiced, and a real comfort level occurred after about 6 months. A hematology-oncology APN group, which formed a successful collaborative practice over a period of 7 years, identified effective lead- ership and shared development of goals and communi- cation as critical for establishment of a viable structure (Schaal et al., 2008). Another collaborative partnership of the CNS and the nurse manager of an oncology unit described the key element of success as development of mutually acceptable goals (Gaguski & Begyn, 2009).
In September 2017, the Department of Veterans Af-
fairs (VA) granted full practice authority for all APNs, except CRNAs, working within the VA system as a means of increasing veteran access to care. Whereas most VA sites implemented what the VA terms “full practice authority” for APNs, about 10% elected to maintain physician supervision. On October 31, 2019, the VA made it clear that this resistance to APN independence was unacceptable. A memo was sent to all VA sites man- dating immediate compliance.
  fte key to the future of a positive and productive collaborative practice for all APNs with physicians and other health professionals is a relationship that becomes more mutually valued and partner driven.
The Nurse Practitioner (NP)
NPs provide high-quality primary, acute, and specialty health-care services across the life span. As of 2020, there were 290,000 NPs licensed/certified in the United States. Since the NP role was created in 1965, more than 50 years of research have consistently demonstrated the excellent outcomes and high-quality care provided by NPs (AANP, 2020).
  fte role of the NP has been described as an inno- vative role in primary care, grown from the role of the public health nurse and possessing a high degree of au- tonomy in practice (Bigbee, 1996). Since its inception in the 1960s, a considerable expansion of the concept of the

NP role has occurred as NPs have moved into a multi- tude of settings that are not necessarily primary care such as long-term and acute care. Because of the unique and varied ways in which the role has developed—coming from certificate programs, many within medical schools, and gradually moving into graduate nurse programs— the history of collaboration is a patchwork quilt. Sup- port for and opposition to the role has come from both medicine and nursing. Martha Rogers (1972) opposed the role as demeaning to nursing in deference to medical practice; and this view, supported by many nurse educa- tors at the time, created serious divisions within the nurs- ing profession as NP educators worked to enhance the role and move it into graduate-level education. Medical opposition, which existed from the beginning, is often couched in terms of patient safety, despite the fact that it often is more related to issues of control and compe- tition in practice. Because of these powerful sources of opposition, the focus on collaboration has been both a boon and a boondoggle to NP practice. fte importance of the interdisciplinary team and the responsibility of the NP to assist in collaborative team development have been consistently emphasized (Buerhaus, 2010; Hanna, 1996). However, because the term collaboration found in some state nursing practice acts often conveys a concept of “supervision,” there are many who would strike the word from any statutory documents. fte evolving acute care NP (ACNP) role requires a very explicit differentia- tion of medical and nursing domains within a collabora- tive practice. Strong support from nursing service—and better yet, having the ACNP housed within the nursing department—allows for easier differentiation of role by each partner. ftis promotes a team in which each part- ner comes from a solid professional sense of self and can then join with others to fuse into an autonomous, in- terdependent team of providers. In contrast, when the ACNP is “supervised” by a resident or is employed by a medical specialty department, it becomes more diffi- cult for the practitioner to participate equally in decision making and to be considered a full partner in the practice (Lott et al., 1996).
fte role of the NP within managed care systems has
evolved into a process of collaboration, coordination, and negotiation, requiring the creation of new relation- ships among a wide range of personnel. Role negotiation is a key component of this type of practice, in which the required interaction between professionals for  the



specific purpose of changing the other’s expectation of one’s role can result in increased job satisfaction, reduced role conflict, and a more positive team relationship (Miller & Apker, 2002). A professional partnership pro- moting collaboration replaces competition with shared responsibilities in which each partner brings a unique and necessary set of knowledge and skills to the practice. Rationales offered for objections to a fully collabora- tive practice included unclear medicolegal issues affecting the ability to “share responsibility,” an absence of inter- disciplinary education at both undergraduate and gradu- ate levels, and lack of knowledge and practice experience regarding the scope of NP practice. fte Missouri Nurses Association (2011) reported that the health-care access and needs of rural Missourians were currently strained and any discussion of solutions must include consider- ing the role of NPs and physician assistants (PAs). ftey stressed that the “future economic stability and health status of rural Missourians depends on . . . [considering] options that allow for increased use of the expertise of ad- vanced practice registered nurses” (Becker & Porth, 2011,
p. 9). Panelist Charlene Hanson summarized the state of
NP practice when she noted that “physicians and NPs at the grassroots have worked out a comfortable, collabo- rative, professional relationship that benefits both. But the relationship at the policy and organizational state and national levels is much more divisive” (Buerhaus, 2010). Expanding this thought, Marshall (2016) noted that obtaining full practice rights for APNs does not come from any federal action so much as from state legislative changes. Despite challenges to NP practice, their value continues to be acknowledged, and the health-system de- livery process continues to change and require a greater focus on teamwork (Maier & Aiken, 2016).


A FRAMEWORK FOR COLLABORATION

The Concept
Collaboration is a “dynamic, transforming process of cre- ating a power-sharing partnership” (Sullivan, 1998, p. 6). As a dynamic process, it includes the flexible distribution of both status and authority and requires both relation- ship building and shared decision making. A distinctive interpersonal process, it requires that the partners recog- nize and acknowledge their shared values and commit to

interact constructively to solve problems and accomplish identified goals, purposes, or outcomes. Using the con- sensus process, where participants are not coerced as in compromise or “majority vote” but rather helped to reach an agreement they can approve, even if they do not agree with all points, facilitates high levels of agreement and team satisfaction. Shared power, a key component within a collaborative practice, requires the active contribution of each participant, respect for and openness to each other’s contributions, and use of consensus in forming new ap- proaches to practice that use the strengths of each partic- ipant (ANA, 2010a; APRN Joint Dialogue Group, 2008; IOM, 2011; O’Brien et al., 2009; Rice et al., 2010).

The Components
A viable and high-level collaborative practice may be read- ily identified by the existence of four essential components: separate and unique practice spheres, common goals, shared power control, and mutual concerns. Table 8.1 presents the components essential for a positive practice, the key attributes of a highly collaborative practice, and practitioner competencies contributing to success. A phe- nomenological study of how APNs and physicians per- ceive and describe their sense of collaboration identified four key behaviors as essential for collaboration: approach- ability, interpersonal skills, listening, and verbal message skills, each of which reflects either the attributes or compe- tencies identified by O’Brien and colleagues (2009).
1. Separate and unique practice spheres. Both physician and nurse must identify components of their prac- tice that are separate and unique and components that they share. A high-level collaborative practice re- quires an autonomous, trusting relationship within which bilateral consultation and referrals are the norm. Autonomy exists within each practitioner’s skill and competence and allows for confident deci- sion making. It is the trust of the team that empow- ers that person to practice independently within his or her defined scope of practice. As one APN noted, “You must be willing to expand your boundaries but know your limitations and where you feel com- fortable in your practice” (Bailey & Armer, 1998,
p. 243). fte existence of bidirectional referral and
consultation reflects a high level of trust between practice partners. In one instance, the physician


   Table 8.1	
Components of Collaborative Practice

Essential ComponentsKey AttributesCompetenciesSeparate and unique practiceAutonomous, trusting relationshipAssertivenessspheres or scope of practiceConfidence in a partner’s skillCommunication skillsCommon goalsBidirectional referrals and consultationConflict managementShared power controlCooperationMutual concernsConsensus-driven decision makingCoordinationEquitable reporting lines and evaluatorsClinical skills Mutual respectMutually defined goals of the practiceDecision-making skills Positive attitudeOpen, informal communication
Parity between providers (physical space, caseload, and support staff)
Positive support by colleagues, support staff, and consumersTrust
Willingness to dialogue

response to a consultation request was, “Now this is not what you have to do; this is what I’d recom- mend. But the final decision is yours because it’s your patient” (Bailey & Armer, 1998, p. 243).
2. Common goals. When both partners agree to respon- sibilities for practice goals, the partners are well on their way to a synchronous relationship. As one pro- vider in a highly collaborative practice noted, “Care by all providers is based on mutually defined goals of the practice” (Bailey & Armer, 1998, p. 245). All the participants cited by Bailey and Armer (1998) stressed that responsibility for patient outcomes was the key driving force in their collaborative actions. One APN noted, “If there’s a patient [I treated] who calls in and . . . says ‘I’m just not better,’ she’ll [the physician will] say things like ‘If I had treated you, I would have given you the same thing.’ It just sets the patient at ease because they realize that we’re working together” (p. 245).
3. Shared power control. Each physician and nurse
partner assumes individual accountability along with a shared responsibility for actively participat- ing in the decision-making process as well as sup- porting the consensus-driven decisions and sharing in their implementation. In one situation, a nurse,

commenting on a physician perceived as very col- laborative, stated, “We started when the MD and PA called me to discuss his patient’s care and asked for suggestions. . . . We examined the patient to- gether, the MD described what we were seeing in the wound and I identified potential strategies for wound healing. . . . fte MD/PA team acknowledged my expertise and came to me for assistance to assist the patient” (McGrail et al., 2008, p. 201). Ongoing and consistent communication is key to building a shared-power practice. Providers must be comfort- able sharing information about patient care, issues of collaboration, and team functioning. Collabora- tion is a powerful tool to build a team, but without shared decision making, collaboration cannot exist (Gaguski & Begyn, 2009; Maylone et al., 2011; O’Grady & Ford, 2009; Sullivan et al., 1998).
4. Mutual concerns. To ensure that mutual concerns are
met, providers need to have skills of assertiveness, cooperation, and coordination. Assertiveness can be described as the ability to express a viewpoint with confidence and with attention to being factually accurate and focused on the patient need. fte key aspect of team success is the knowledge and utiliza- tion of each member’s expertise by the others. For



example, in a surgical care situation, the physician is in charge of the operation; the physician and NP or CNS jointly care for the patient postoperatively; the NP or CNS is in charge of discharge planning; and in some settings the CRNA might also be on the surgical team, assuming full responsibility for anesthesia delivery, each one confident in their skills and able to speak up regarding patient needs and care direction as they see it. Acknowledgment and respect of other opinions and viewpoints while maintaining the willingness to examine and change personal beliefs and perspectives stresses the inter- dependence of the practitioners on the team and underlies true cooperation. Collegial relationships replace hierarchical authority with equality and shared decision making. Decisions made by consen- sus are based on the expertise of each member; there are different levels of input, but it is always in the best interest of the patient. One APN noted, “ftere are many times the physician will say to me ‘ftis is

a nurse practitioner patient,’ and it’s somebody that has all kinds of sociological problems. Problems that I could coordinate, and that’s good; that’s a compli- ment to nursing. He actually has learned what we do” (Bailey & Armer, 1998, p. 243). Trust is the bond that unites all the components of collabora- tion. “Without the element of trust, cooperation cannot exist, assertiveness becomes threatening, responsibility is avoided, communication is ham- pered, autonomy is suppressed, and coordination is haphazard” (Norsen et al., 1995, p. 45).

The Intensity Continuum
fte level of collaboration within a practice can be found by identifying the intensity of professional relationships (high to low) and the type of collaborative structure found along a complexity continuum of unidisciplinary, multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, or transdisciplinary practice. See Figure 8.1. fte interactive complexity of




Figure 8.1 Intensity Continuum. (Data from Blais et al., 2002; Kuehn, 1998)



the practice will increase as the structure becomes more complex, offering greater challenges to the team but re- sulting in even more positive and productive outcomes of practice.
   Professional staff in any health setting (e.g., licensed practical nurse [LPN], RN, social worker, APN, physi- cian, radiology technician, and so on) are coming from a unidisciplinary base. As students, they were prepared for the interactive world of practice within the security of working with students, faculty, and practitioners of their discipline and program. ftey begin to develop per- sonal mastery of professional knowledge and skills, an essential requirement for functioning effectively at the more complex levels of interactive relationships found in collaborative practice. Educational experiences with students of other professions are generally very limited, usually to clinical encounters. As the professionals be- gin to share responsibilities for the same patient or pa- tient populations, they begin to interact with each other and a multidisciplinary practice model emerges. ftis is a level of information exchange with no presumption of shared planning. Each fulfills a discipline-specific role but communicates with others on an as-needed ba- sis. ftis level exemplifies the “chimneys of excellence” approach in which work is accomplished not by team effort but by a collection of professionals working for the most part in “isolated splendor” (Kuehn, 1998,
p. 27). However,  within this multidisciplinary  frame-
work, an interdisciplinary relationship can begin to de- velop as two or more members begin to coalesce their roles toward a common vision or goal. ftere begins to be a sense of shared investment and a desire to plan to- gether for a better outcome. As each professional shares discipline-specific expertise, cross-fertilization of ideas starts to occur, and group ownership of the practice be- gins to emerge. fte dynamics that revolve around the emerging practitioner-to-practitioner relationships con- cern issues of leadership, power control, norms, values, group behavior, and conflicts and demand skills in com- munication, collaboration, and conflict resolution. Ma- jor growth in the complexity of interactive practices can be seen by the increased use of the terms interdisciplinary and interprofessional to describe this third level of team dynamics as a key requisite for high-quality care (Amer- ican Medical Directors Association [AMDA], 2011; Donald et al., 2009; Parse, 2015; Rice et al., 2010). Parse

(2015) describes distinctive differences between interdis- ciplinary and interprofessional, contrasting discipline as the body of scientific knowledge that is the basis of that discipline’s practice and research with profession as those educated professionals committed to the vision and pur- pose of that vision. Interdisciplinary then refers to the joining of two or more disciplines in educational courses or projects with each discipline preserving its uniqueness while being complementary to the other(s). In contrast, interprofessional describes unique disciplinary knowledge applied in the service each discipline offers in a specific health situation. “Each professional comes to the situ- ation with disciplinary knowledge and one profession does not preside over the others” (p. 5). fte second ba- sic tenet of nursing practice (ANA, 2010a) notes that “nurses coordinate care by establishing partnerships . . . collaborative interprofessional team planning is based on recognition of each discipline’s value and contribu- tions, mutual trust, respect, open discussion and shared decision-making” (p. 4).
fte intensity of relationships is at a peak when a
practice moves into a transdisciplinary level. It becomes a practice without professional boundaries, a synthesis of knowledge and practice. Here the practitioners are able to rise above fears of being subsumed and the individual visions of each become a shared vision with “laser-beam” intensity. All, including the patient, own the plan of care and the goal of high-quality patient care transcends any “turf” issues. As the number of participants increases, the resulting diversity, complexity, and intensity of re- lationship building requires that each participant feels that he or she “owns” the vision. fte critical indicators of collaboration are now a part of each and a visible part of the whole. At this level communication through dia- logue is the key to success. Discussion, coming from the same root word as percussion, implies a hard exchange of ideas bouncing back and forth, presented and defended with the need to come to a decision. In contrast, the art of dialogue allows for free exploration of ideas, issues, and innovations with no sense of defensiveness and the ability to suspend personal viewpoints. When a team ar- rives at this point, they become in such close alignment that when working together they enter the “transdisci- plinary” stage of collaboration in which they act as one and do not have to think about it. Senge (1994) offers an example using the Boston Celtics, a basketball team



that won 11 world championships in just 13 years. fte famed Celtics center Bill Russell described their team play not as friendship, but as a synchronous relationship among the players. He stated (p. 234) that sometimes during a game, it would “heat up so that it became more than a physical or even mental game . . . and would be magical. . . . When it happened, I could feel my play rise to a new level. . . . It would surround not only me and the other Celtics but also the players on the other team, and even the referees. . . . At that special level, all sorts of odd things happened. fte game would be in the white heat of competition and yet I wouldn’t feel competitive, which is a miracle in itself. . . . fte game would move so fast that every fake, cut and pass would be surprising, and yet nothing could surprise me . . . during those spells I could almost sense how the next play would develop and where the next shot would be taken.”
To develop positive relationships with other health-
care practitioners, comprehensive care requires the col- lective contributions of many varied professionals with highly developed skills, including self-knowledge and traditions of knowledge in the health professions; team and community building; and work dynamics of groups,

teams, and organizations. Practitioners must be familiar with the healing approaches of other professions and cultures, be aware of historic power inequities across professions, identify similarities and differences among traditions of community members, know the value of the work of others, and learn from having had experiences of working with people from other disciplines and healing traditions. fte key to team building is the affirmation by all of a shared mission, tasks, goals, and values (ANA, 2010a; IOM, 2004, 2011; Jehn et al., 1999; Senge,
1994).

The“Iceberg” Effect
Where the team of APN and physician falls on the col- laboration continuum, as well as the intensity of the relationships, is determined by several critical factors. ftese factors can be visualized as an iceberg with many factors visible and openly known and others that remain invisible or unacknowledged although still extremely sig- nificant in their effect on the success or failure of the col- laborative effort (Pearson & Jones, 1994; Plant, 1987). See Figure 8.2.





Figure 8.2 Iceberg Factor. (Data from Kuehn, 1998; Pearson & Jones, 1994; Plant, 1987)



   fte formal “visible” systems include many common components of practice such as organizational policies, clinic objectives, systems of communications, and role or job descriptions. ftese are accessible and changeable and are readily addressed in open, rational discussion. In contrast, the “invisible,” informal systems, including power networks, values, and norms, are not as accessi- ble but subtly present, difficult to change, and often give a sense of being untouchable. Many of the barriers to collaboration are hidden here. Only through working together can a team become aware of the impact of this invisible system and work to eliminate the barriers. fte barriers must first be identified and acknowledged and then strategies applied to remove or neutralize them as the partners in practice work to become a viable team (Donald et al., 2009; IOM, 2011; Maier & Aiken, 2016; McCarter et al., 2016; Paradise et al., 2011).

BARRIERS TO COLLABORATION

Barriers to collaboration hinder positive change and growth in our health-care system, frustrate the profes- sionals trying to work as a team, and can negatively affect the future of health care (IOM, 2011, 2015; Kubota, 2011; Rice et al., 2010). Key barriers that continue to challenge collaborative efforts include educational isola- tion, professional elitism, organizational hierarchy, un- recognized diversity, expanding scopes of practice, role and language confusion, inadequate and inappropriate communication patterns, and professional dissonance.

Educational Isolation
Despite an increasing call for an interdisciplinary ap- proach to education in the health professions, many educators continue to use a traditional linear approach with built-in assumptions of bureaucratic organizational structures; standardized sets of relationships and roles; and systematized methods of record keeping, billing, and payment for services. Past studies exploring the status of interdisciplinary education have noted many inherent problems associated with developing interdis- ciplinary educational programs, citing workload stress, intense workload demands, lack of academic and insti- tutional support, and often seemingly insurmountable

complications with clinical arrangements (Kuehn, 1998). In the past, some nurse educators have expressed concerns that the traditional concept of a nursing work- force is challenged by calls for health care to be delivered by interdisciplinary teams, fearing that this focus has the potential of obscuring the unique contribution of nurs- ing to health-care delivery (National League for Nursing [NLN], 1997). However, shared educational experiences can actually help clarify roles because as faculty and stu- dents work together, they begin to better understand the contribution that each profession makes to the practice (Glasgow et al., 2010; Hojat et al., 2003). Interprofes- sional continuing education might focus on team build- ing or on a specific patient care problem, helping health professionals acknowledge the value each brings to the situation and focusing on the patient rather than the dis- cipline (Sauter et al., 2016; Trossman, 2014).

Professional Elitism
Educational isolationism easily leads to professional elit- ism as each profession educates “its own” with a sense of importance and unique worth. Professionalism consists of three components: the professional ideals of knowl- edge and service, the professional occupation and the life career it provides, and the character of the work itself. fte life career is the vehicle through which the ideals are put into practice, and the profession itself defines the character of professional work. fte commitment to healing and to service is thereby limited by the definition of healing and public service crafted by the profession. Although “importance” and “worth” are valued aspects of self-identity, a pervasive sense of professional elitism running through this approach can result in the work of each professional taking priority over helping each other or putting the patient’s needs first (O’Neil & Pew Health Professions Commission, 1998). In his classic discourse on medical dominance, Friedson (1970) claimed that the dominant position of the medical profession in the health division of labor “allows it to reinforce and protect itself from outside influence and to claim and maintain jurisdiction and control over many more areas than logic or evidence justifies. . . . It is ‘professionalism’ itself that seems to transform the ideal responsibility to serve the good of the general public into a limited concrete re- sponsibility to serve the good of one’s personal public”



(p. 152). As Friedson (1970) cautioned, “A professional who is so qualified as to perform this extraordinary work of medicine . . . must himself be a rather extraordinary, gifted, person . . . as are his colleagues and his profes- sion. . . . ftis professional pride leads the worker to consider himself to be quite different from, indeed su- perior to, those of other occupations. . . . fte thrust of professional activity becomes a mission to build barriers that keep the profession and its clientele safe from those beyond the pale while seeking jurisdiction over all that cannot be excluded” (pp. 154–155). In one interven- tion study to improve interprofessional collaboration, physicians reported that they expected orders would be carried out without discussion. Nurses and other health professionals in the study agreed that this was the med- ical expectation and it limited the possibility of much collaboration (Rice et al., 2010).
Nursing should acknowledge that it, too, has been
guilty of elitism and of exhibiting professional dominance and defensiveness, both in relating to other nurses with dif- ferent levels of education and expertise and in working with other health-care professionals. Lack of understanding, failure to acknowledge roles and responsibilities of other professionals, and the very isolated nature of health pro- fessional education is the basis for much of the elitism still prevalent today (Glasgow et al., 2010; Rice et al., 2010).

Organizational Hierarchy
fte key to the inadequacy of health services is described as “professional dominance,” a situation in which health services revolve around professional authority with a foundational structure of dominance by a single pro- fession over a variety of other “subordinate professions” (Friedson, 1970). fte two lines of authority in medicine and health care have historically been the administrative authority of the “office” and the medical authority of professional skills and expertise. fte medical profession as an occupation with institutionalized privileges and authority granted by others on a basis of faith and trust holds a special form of legal “power” based on “expert status” because their knowledge and work are consid- ered very complex and nonroutine and subsequently has a position of dominance among other occupations providing health care. ftis results in professional control of information and suspicion of the value of what lies

“outside” their domain. Friedson (1970, pp. 231, 234) suggests that this autonomy and dominance need to be and can be controlled by an administrative structure that stresses accountability for effective and humane services and is responsive to the patient:
For a profession to be true to the ideal of a profes- sion, members must let go of the total authority and control over the terms and content of their work and cease total dominance in favor of a division of labor. fte physicians must temper autonomy and domi- nance with administrative accountability, account- ability to the patient, self-regulated peer review, and encouragement of other providers to assume respon- sibilities of health care . . . [However] no service us- ing other providers is possible . . . without the active cooperation of the dominant profession. If the pro- fession does not trust them, or if it resents and fears them, it will not refer patients to them, nor will it gra- ciously receive patients referred from them. . . . Mere administrative fiat is not enough.
Supervision is defined as critically watching and directing activities or a course of action and is a mainstay of any hierarchical structure. Rationales given for supervision of health care include documented inadequacy; lack of knowledge, experience, or skills in relation to the person supervised; legal requirements; a lack of trust or confi- dence despite no legal limits requiring supervision; per- ceived safety needs of patient or provider; and history, tradition, or local institutional policy. In exploring the difference between “under the supervision of” and “own- ership of practice decisions,” it may be most helpful to view them not as polar opposites but as different lev- els of collaboration along a continuum of autonomous practice. Kinlein (1977) stressed that if a physician, a member of one profession, determines by his or her or- ders what actions a nurse, a member of a separate profes- sion, will take, the practice is no longer the “essence of nursing” but becomes “medically directed care” delivered by nurses (p. 30). Supervised or medically directed care seems to fall within the framework of multidisciplinary interactions representing a very limited level of inten- sity of relationships and collaboration. Supervision may not preclude some level of collaboration, but it seems to severely limit its scope. fte extent of collaboration pos- sible within such a “delegated” mindset is questionable.



Unrecognized Diversity
Diversity in a health-care team can have a powerful im- pact on its success or failure as a cohesive workgroup. It can bring a wealth of helpful differences but can also be the cause of great conflict within the group. Cultural di- versity may be easily recognized and acknowledged, but there are many complex aspects of diversity that may not be recognized and that can undermine team efforts. ftree major categories of diversity are informational, social and value (Jehn et al., 1999). Informational diver- sity reflects the differences in knowledge and perspec- tives of team members flowing from their education, experiences, and levels of expertise. Social-category diversity relates to age, race, gender, and ethnicity and is the aspect with which we are most familiar as cul- tural diversity. Value diversity reflects the differences in members’ perspectives of the mission, goals, and values relating to the work at hand. A study of the impact of diversity on work-group performance found that differ- ent forms of diversity could result in different levels of performance within the team. Having high information diversity (differences in education and experience) can make a team quite effective because of the many pro- fessional perspectives that can be available to the team. However, if it is accompanied by high value diversity, the team may malfunction as a unit. Over time, age, gender, and race differences in a group become less important, but value diversity—differences in under- standing of the mission, goals, and values—becomes the more important component as a predictor of con- flict or success. fte complexity of relationships within a team is heightened by the level and type of diversity. Often unrecognized or unacknowledged, value diversity may be the most critical factor in the success or failure of teamwork and collaboration (Jehn et al., 1999). fte implementation of the PPACA seems to have brought more intensity to the conflicts among health profes- sionals regarding SOP; and Gardner emphasizes that the most visible interdisciplinary fight is over SOP expansion, noting that “until there is an expansion of SOP, APRNs in many states will not be able to provide services to the fullest extent of their training and knowl- edge, skills and experiences” (Gardner, 2010, p. 264). Gardner then notes that disputes are not only interest based, but values based and professional identity based

as well. Identity conflicts seem to relate to a professional’s need to be treated with deference or one’s difficulty in compromise; value-based conflicts arise when values re- lating to one professional culture differ from the other, such as in lines of communication being unidirectional; conflicts of interest seem to imply that one professional should get more (money, prestige, patient say) at the ex- pense of the other. fte challenge is to somehow address these issues using strategies such as mediation, clarify- ing SOP and interprofessional education.
Expanding Scopes of Practice
Nursing SOP is the extent of clinical actions, decision making, and patient management responsibilities au- thorized by state and federal law (i.e., the legal base of practice). However, SOP evolves and changes over time as variables change: nursing education, state and federal laws, professional standards and guidelines, pol- icies of the workplace, experience of the nurse, chang- ing needs of the community, expanding SOPs of other health professionals (such as pharmacists), and emerg- ing models of health-care delivery that expand the role of non-health-care professionals. Schuiling and Slager (2000) described this as “freedom with limits,” noting that determining one’s SOP requires the health profes- sional to first review the “inflexible boundaries” set down by professional standards of practice and core compe- tencies and then examine the clinical reality and extent of his or her practice, considering the practice setting, education, years of experience, nature of collaborative relationships, and needs of the community. ftis latter is the flexible “gray area” that helps to better define and po- tentially change the “inflexible” current legal parameters of practice. Although the IOM’s report (2011) on the future of nursing supported expansion of nursing’s SOP and the ACA of 2010 opened the way for new models of care using nurses in expanding roles, the ability for APNs to practice to the full extent of their education and expertise continues to rest in the hands of state legisla- tors (Marshall, 2016). Nurses must continue to provide education to other health professionals and the public regarding the realities of their education and expertise. Clarity of SOP is key to team building and collaboration among practitioners and for full implementation of the nurse’s practice potential.



Role and Language Confusion
fte expanding scope of nursing practice across the United States continues to be hampered by inconsisten- cies of legal language and titling variations among states. Additional challenges to the clarity of health-provider roles and SOP arise as pharmacists seek to provide pa- tient education as well as independent prescriptive privi- leges and provision of immunizations in local pharmacies and as CNMs seek legislative approval to provide pri- mary care (Keely, 2002; Phillippi & Barger, 2015). In examining the role of “primary care provider,” Starfield (1992b) identified three types of functions performed by nonphysician personnel: (a) supplementary, extending the efficiency of the physician by assuming the techni- cal tasks, usually under the direction of the physician;
(b) substitutive, providing services usually provided by
physicians; and (c) complementary, extending the effec- tiveness of physicians by doing things that physicians do not do at all, do poorly, or do reluctantly. Noting that the nonphysician role has not been clarified to the extent that the three functions can be differentiated, Starfield con- cluded that primary care is largely a physician-dominated effort. Although primary care cannot function without some teamwork involving other practitioner providers, she believed that there was little evidence supporting the concept of team practice and little research indicating when and under what conditions a team approach may be more effective than a singular practice approach. In conclusion, Starfield asserted that primary care should be provided by physicians and the concept of teamwork in primary care needed to be researched regarding (a) stan- dards for different roles and relationships; (b) identifica- tion of which type of delegated function—substitutive, supplementary, or complementary—is most appro- priately assumed by what level or type provider; and
(c) how well the attributes of primary care are achieved
by nonphysicians in comparison with care by physicians. Concerns raised by Starfield’s discussion of the primary care center were related to the language used as well as her consistent adherence to the traditional medical view- point of the physician as the “captain of the ship.” fte use of the term team is quite perfunctory and seems to imply only a multidisciplinary collection of individuals gathered by the physician to facilitate his or her practice. fte three functional types—supplementary, substitutive,

and complementary—are defined in relation to their ability to enhance physician effectiveness rather than as shared components of a joint practice. In addition, Star- field (1992a) frames the role of the nonphysician pro- vider by tasks and functions, severely limiting the scope of advanced practice and the role of collaboration.
   Collaboration, often used in statute, is frequently in- terpreted in rules and regulations as “supervision,” im- plying a hierarchical relationship and a contradiction to the critical indicators of collaboration. For collabo- ration to consistently mean an egalitarian, collegial re- lationship, the legislative language must be more clearly defined. fte question becomes whether power sharing can coexist with a supervision requirement in a practice. When collaboration is mandated, or termed supervision, the process of shared practice becomes one of forced ne- gotiation in which the dominant profession, medicine, has the choice of collaboration with no legal need for a collaborative partner; whereas, the subjected profession, nursing, must obtain a collaborative partner to legally function within the full scope of its practice (Sullivan et al., 1998). Physician involvement can be termed col- laboration, supervision, direction, delegation, or authoriza- tion, and the meaning of each term can be ambiguous, particularly in statute.
Statutory requirements for collaboration for advanced
practice nursing couched as “delegated” or “supervised” practice are not acceptable for several time-tested rea- sons. If patterns of practice are legislated, legislative judgment becomes limited by the parameters of the legal definitions, rules, and regulations of the state in which the practice is located. fte flexibility needed for indi- vidual clinical situations may be seriously compromised by these legally defined parameters. fte result is that, because of restrictive legislation, rules, regulations, and reimbursement policies, advanced nursing practice too often depends on the willingness of a physician collab- orator, whereas the same limitations are not placed on the physician. “One can only imagine what the reaction of organized medicine would be if a state legislature at- tempted to delineate when and how internist physicians should refer patients to a specialist” (ANA, 1998, p. 4). Legislatively mandated collaboration often results in a conflict (Sullivan, 1998). In states where APN practice is controlled by joint board decisions, the negotiation process of joint rule making can become very hostile



because of an unequal balance of power among the par- ties. Further, when membership of the board of nursing includes representatives of each level of nursing, those members not in advanced practice may lack the knowl- edge base required for debating advanced practice issues such as prescriptive authority. fte subsequent rules passed may be far more restrictive than had been imag- ined from the broader language of the statute. Reasons offered by Sullivan and colleagues (1998) for the failure of these disparate groups to accomplish an externally imposed power-sharing partnership are not difficult to understand. ftey state that “because the participants did not share a common purpose or vision, and were forced to meet, it is not surprising that they did not work well together or achieve a satisfactory result—by any stan- dards. Because the representatives were forced to come together and their Boards had their budgets held hostage to the process, it was not unexpected that despite the need to reach some level of agreement there was little commitment to a win-win situation. Instead, representa- tives of each discipline worked to protect their distinctly different professional agendas. It became not a collabo- rative process but a legalistic and formalized process of enforced negotiation.”
Collaboration has also been described as an interde-
pendent, interdisciplinary practice in which the APN role is “substitutive” in a primary care setting in contrast to the “complementary” role more applicable to acute care settings (King et al., 1996). However, there are dif- ficulties with the use of the term substitutive because it implies a temporary stopgap until the “regular” practi- tioner can be provided. More contemporary views of collaboration and interdisciplinary practice steer clear of the substitutive and complementary language and stress partnership and the unique areas of expertise of each member of the team (Donald et al., 2009; IOM, 2011). Another language issue relates to the use of proto- cols and clinical guidelines. Protocols are defined as the “detailed plan of a scientific or medical experiment, treatment, or procedure” (Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary, 1994). In research, protocols need to be fol- lowed “to the letter” to produce accurate, consistent, and comparable sets of data. fte registered nurse fol- lows protocols in the management of some patients. fte concern with protocols comes with their use in statutes, rules, and regulations as a definitive set of boundaries

restricting practice to sets of predetermined criteria. When the perception of nursing is a dependent practice under physician supervision, the mechanisms created for allowing advanced practice often include a system of protocols designed with the approval of the “collaborat- ing” physician. However, this “solution” compromises the concept of nursing autonomy, suggests that the nurse is incapable of making accurate choices among treat- ment options, and becomes implicit “standing orders” reinforcing nursing dependency (Baer, 1993). In some states, neither protocols nor a collaborative practice agreement with a physician is required for full practice privileges. In others, if prescriptive authority is possible, a collaborative practice agreement with a physician may be required but perhaps no protocols. Historically, clin- ical guidelines represented collective wisdom gathered over time and were considered no threat to autonomy. In contrast, guidelines today may not be as willingly accepted because of the fear that they might influence or “manage” provider behavior. If guidelines or proto- cols allow room for the exercise of provider judgment, they support provider autonomy as well. fte Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) uses the term clinical practice guidelines to describe systematically developed statements to assist practitioner and patient decisions about appropriate health care for specific clin- ical conditions. ftese guidelines may be broad or very detailed based on literature review as well as expert opinion, and they are written by independent multi- disciplinary panels of private-sector clinicians and other experts supported by the AHRQ. Practitioners must have clinical guidelines in place for reimbursement from Medicare (Newman, 1996), and guidelines are viewed sometimes as an excellent tool for communicating the role to funding agencies (Way & Jones, 1994).
One additional aspect of language confusion is that
of “titling” of APRNs. Many titles found in the different state statutes include advanced nurse practitioner (ANP), advanced practice nurse (APN), advanced practice pro- fessional nurse (APPN), advanced practice registered nurse (APRN), advanced registered nurse practitioner (ARNP), certified nurse practitioner (CNP), and reg- istered nurse practitioner (RNP). fte APRN Consensus Model for APRN Regulation—Licensure, Accreditation, Certification, and Education (LACE)—defines advanced practice and each specialty, describes the regulatory



model, and identifies titles to be used. ftis document was created by regulators, nurse educators, APRN certifi- ers, and representatives of a large number of APRN pro- fessional organizations with the goal of creating national consistency regarding laws and rules regulating APRN practice. With some physician groups still insisting on supervision, the challenge remains to get past the lan- guage barriers and clarify roles to foster a collaborative approach to care. The Pearson Report (2019) encourages APRNs to share the updated legislative information with their legislators to help them understand that APRNs are competent and high-quality clinicians and to encourage them to remove barriers to advanced practice nursing.
fte launching of doctorate of nursing practice
(DNP) programs has also created some language dif- ficulties. fte fairly recent nursing doctorate (ND) has been phased out, and the DNP is now identified as the future expectation for all APRNs. One expected benefit of the DNP is the greater opportunity to fully partici- pate on the interdisciplinary team. However, there are challenges to the concept such as suggestions that the educational and clinical residency requirements of the DNP do not prepare one for becoming faculty, assum- ing leadership roles, or conducting clinical research (Brar et al., 2010; Webber, 2008). In addition, the term Dr. Nurse is causing many physician groups to challenge not only the terminology but also the concept itself (Landro, 2008). In some states, legislation has directly challenged the nurses’ ability to be called “Doctor” despite having doctoral credentials, simply because they are not “physi- cians.” Instances in which the APRN is described as as- suming the “dual role of physician and nurse” can lead to a misconception of the nurse role. No nurse can assume the role of a physician, nor can a physician assume the role of a nurse. What is possible is that certain responsi- bilities, functions, and skills are learned and assumed by both providers. When the nurse assumes some of the re- sponsibilities, functions, and skills traditionally assumed by the physician, if they fall within the scope of nurs- ing practice, they are nursing. If they fall outside, they are considered medically directed acts, and the nurse in that instance is serving as assistant to the physician. It follows, then, that if a physician assumes some of the re- sponsibilities, functions, and skills traditionally assumed by the nurse, they would be considered nurse-directed acts, and the physician is serving as assistant to the nurse.

Inadequate and Inappropriate Communication Patterns
When physicians and nurses do not share information or concerns, when communication is a one-way street, or when there is an inadequate system of written and verbal communication, quality of patient care suffers. Poor communication patterns also affect working rela- tionships and seriously hinder any attempts at collabo- ration, often resulting in separate professional decision making that can create confusion and safety issues (Clarin, 2007; Zwarenstein & Bryant, 2000). Inappro- priate communication patterns may reflect a pattern of “physician abuse.” In a survey about nurse–physician relationships (Rosenstein, 2002), the level of respect for nurse input and collaboration was rated signifi- cantly higher by physicians than by nurses. However, physicians rated the findings on how important the physician’s disruptive behavior was in contributing to nurse dissatisfaction and low morale much lower than nurses did. ftese findings reflect a dissonance in per- ception that is often a result of poor communication and lack of trust, creating a defensive, noncollaborative practice environment in which the number of errors rises and patient safety and positive patient outcomes are threatened. Magnet hospitals, emphasizing col- laboration between physicians and nurses, have been documented as having better patient outcomes and fewer problems relating to shortages, turnover, or abuse (Drenkard, 2010).

Professional Dissonance
When diversity is not recognized and acknowledged, the result is professional dissonance with a serious negative impact on the capacity for teamwork. Confusion of lan- guage, differing communication patterns and ways of interacting, and difficulty respecting each other’s skills and roles are inevitable. In a study of attitudes regard- ing teamwork by critical care nurses and physicians, a seven-item “teamwork climate scale” was developed. It found that nurses and physicians had distinctly different attitudes toward teamwork. fte source of the differences was found to be status or authority, responsibilities, gen- der, training, and professional culture (ftomas et al., 2003). In a study of nurses and physicians in a medical



intensive care unit (ICU), Baggs and Schmitt (1997) found that collaboration would occur only if the time and place were appropriate; the physician believed that the nurse had the knowledge needed; and trust, respect, and sincere interest in teamwork were present. For ex- ample, the physicians believed that the general medical unit nurses did not have the same level of knowledge about medical illness as the medical ICU nurses. ftis perceived knowledge level was a precondition to the physicians’ willingness to collaborate more effectively with the nurses in the ICU.
  A study by Jones (1994) explored the nature of nurse–physician collaboration, examining the differ- ences and similarities in their perceptions related to the four indicators of nurse–physician collaboration identi- fied in the ANA social policy statement of 1980: mutual power control, mutual safeguarding of provider con- cerns, responsibility for practice, and practice goals. fte findings offer an interesting portrait of the collaborative perspective of the partners. Although nurses and physi- cians were in agreement on power control, most affirmed that the physician initiated more communications than the nurse, indicating a lack of mutual power control. In another study examining provider concerns, nurses and physicians were rated on the degree to which they achieved both assertiveness and cooperativeness with high levels of both dimensions indicating collaboration. Nearly half of the responses reflected competition, com- promise, or accommodation as the preferred method of safeguarding concerns. ftey did not agree on where re- sponsibility for practice should rest—nurse or physician, or both—and they agreed on only 4 of 24 practice goals (e.g., maintain elimination patterns, promote cardiovas- cular healing). fte conclusion reached was that nurses and physicians who cannot agree on provider responsi- bility regarding areas of practice and patient goals reflect a lower level of collaboration and will not be able to de- liver the same high level of coordinated patient care as those nurse–physician teams who agree on the areas of responsibility (Norsen et al., 1995).

The Bottom Line
Barriers to collaboration hinder positive change and growth in our health-care system but do not need to be perpetuated. Organizational climate and culture are

living, growing aspects of institutional work life that bind the organization together. Professions and profes- sionals are not static. ftey can and must work to elimi- nate barriers to collaboration and create a new culture of team practice in health care.

STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS


Collaboration is a developmental process that emerges slowly through a series of sensitive and delicate interac- tions. Members of a newly forged partnership join forces in the belief that the common need they recognize can best be met through their combined efforts. Levels of collaboration achieved depend on context, ability, and the desire of the prospective partners to skillfully de- velop the practice. Based on the conceptual framework of collaboration described in this chapter, the following are some key strategies for developing a successful col- laborative team.

Create a Collegial Team
Teamwork is a critical need for today and the reality of tomorrow’s practice. Peters and Waterman (1982), fo- cusing on people as the means to achieve productivity, suggested that coworkers should be treated as partners. fte reality of this shift of power from an authoritarian command structure to one of collegial teamwork can result in innovation, rapid response, and greater access by the customer. However, it requires a considerable mind shift by participants. fte redesign of a health-care delivery model that supports a collegial, interdisciplin- ary team approach requires a radical way of thinking to acknowledge that this new model is not something “out there” but belongs to each of the participants as they confront their learned beliefs and perspectives. In addition, the participants must realize that they must undergo a significant cultural shift in accepting that they must become a community of learners, a “learning orga- nization” that never “arrives” but continues to translate a shared vision into an ever-evolving practice (O’Brien et al., 2009; Rice et al., 2010; Senge, 1994). fte key feature of this type of learning organization is a realiza- tion that the role of the “grand strategist” at the top is no longer possible because of the complexity and dynamic



status of work. Instead, each individual participant’s commitment and capacity to learn is tapped. Unlike a linear approach, the learning organization forges ahead based on shared understandings of interrelationships and patterns of change, thereby creating a common bond of commitment to the practice.
   One approach to initiating dialogue to address profes- sional conflicts of values, professional identity, and inter- ests is through mediation. Gardner (2010) suggests that the mediator challenge key medical and nursing profes- sionals to “acknowledge their core values, to facilitate dis- cussions in which each side accepts those aspects of the other’s values that it can agree with, and then build on those shared beliefs” (p. 266). In summary, five qualities are suggested as essential for participants in the “learn- ing organization” that never “arrives” but continues to translate a shared vision into an ever-evolving practice (O’Brien et al., 2009; Rice et al., 2010; Senge, 1994):

1. Personal mastery. fte practitioner is true to a per- sonal vision while staying committed to the truth of the current reality.
2. Use of mental models. Learning is accelerated as we mentally consider alternative scenarios for care de- livery. Participants do not become overly attached to one scenario because it could freeze them into rigid adherence to outdated approaches to care.
3. Shared vision. Shared vision is described by Senge (1994) as the “first step in allowing people who mis- trusted each other to begin to work together as it creates a common identity and sense of purpose” (p. 208).
4. Team learning. Nurses, physicians, and others on the team learn to think together about complex is- sues, acknowledging that the whole is truly greater than any of the individuals. ftey develop what is termed operational trust and master the practice of both dialogue and discussion. fte apex of “team” is at the transdisciplinary level.
5. Systems thinking. Foundational in teamwork, sys- tems thinking forces a focus on the whole pattern of the collaborative practice rather than any isolated role. fte structure or key interrelationships of the practice pattern influence behavior and decision making and are examined collectively.

Accept Growth and Development as a Joint Responsibility
For the concept of collaborative practice to grow and flourish, interdisciplinary education must be supported, affirming the values and roles of both physician and nurse. Educational institutions must reaffirm the value of education for interdisciplinary practice and imple- ment the results of studies of the effect of collaboration on clinical outcomes. In practice, bidirectional referrals must be promoted and must include the expanded APN SOP and “skill set” found in the APN role description. Professionals and the public must be educated regarding the roles by both physician and nurse partners. Strategies recommended for physicians to address physician abuse and improve collaboration include physician education, zero-tolerance policies, role playing, and changing the culture of the environment from defensive and hierar- chical to supportive and collegial. Nurse responsibility for the problem—in tolerating the behavior, perpetuat- ing the inequalities in the nurse–physician relationship, and sometimes countering with abusiveness—should be addressed with education, role playing, assumption of accountability, and an assertive capability to share the nursing perspective (Buerhaus, 2010; Fischman, 2002; Glasgow et al., 2010).

Use Protocols and Guidelines Wisely
In clinical practice, protocol is often used synonymously with clinical guidelines and is representative of a state- ment of agreement between the APN and their col- laborating physician. When the providers agree on a standard of care acceptable to both, the guidelines or protocols stand as their codification of acceptable crite- ria for diagnosing and managing an illness or condition. Classic texts such as Patient Care Guidelines for Nurse Practitioners (Hoole et al., 1999) and Gerontological Pro- tocols for Nurse Practitioners (Brown et al., 1999) offer excellent resources for practitioners as well as sometimes serving as the basis for legal documentation to allow for treatment and prescriptive privileges through incorpo- ration into the collaborative agreement as the agreed-to standard of care.
Clinical practice guideline development must include
three aspects to accomplish its goal. First, identification



of key decisions and their consequences must be out- lined. In the case of the APN, there are decisions to be made about when to call the physician with questions and when referral to an outside specialist is in order. fte process of reviewing charts and prescriptions is the second aspect. Finally, reimbursement from insurance providers must be defined because of strict insurance policies and legislative mandates. Although state and federal statutes may allow for certain billing practices, the viability of the practice may be hampered when nurse professionals are limited to lesser reimbursement amounts or are refused reimbursement. Legislative language in many states must continue to be reworked to clarify the meaning of the terminology, the role and scope allowed, and the effect on practice viability of protocols and clinical guidelines. Progress is ongoing regarding legislative and statutory language changes needed for clarification and full SOP. The Pearson Report of 2011 noted that there were 31 states reporting an expanded SOP for APNs through legisla- tive or regulatory changes in 2009, compared with 22 in 2008 and 19 in 2007. In 2015, three states completely eliminated collaborative and supervisory models of prac- tice. In July 2020, Florida was the 23rd state plus the District of Columbia (DC) that now allow for full APN SOP, meaning no collaborative agreements with a physi- cian are required. fte remaining states are categorized as either “reduced practice” (16 states or 34%) or “restricted practice” (11 states or 24%) (AANP, 2019). States that still require some sort of agreement for prescribing and advanced clinical practice underline a need to continue to work to remove barriers to full SOP for APNs. fte annual legislative reports of Phillips (2020) provide a benchmark and an incentive for regulatory reform and language clarity; however, practitioners must be careful to not eliminate collaboration itself as they move to elim- inate restrictive collaborative agreement requirements.

Watch Your Language
Language is one of the most significant facets of both per- sonal and professional relationships. In an editorial from American Family Physician (Phillips et al., 2001), a phy- sician professor took aim at the use of the term health- care provider, noting that “calling me a ‘provider’ lumps my physician colleagues and me with individuals who are frankly less qualified and yet aspire to do the same work we do . . . the use of terms . . . although ‘politically correct’

diminish us as professionals” (p. 1342). ftat same year an article in the Annual Review of Medicine (Cooper, 2001) was titled “Health Care Workforce for the Twenty-First Century: fte Impact of Nonphysician Clinicians.” “No APN I have ever known has positively embraced the con- cept of their practice being that of a “nonphysician clini- cian.” In a forecast study of Missouri nursing (Kuehn & Porter, 1993), the first round of the Delphi brought to- gether both nurse and nonnurse participants. One physi- cian commented that it was the first time he had ever been called a nonnurse and found it rather demeaning. When he was reminded of the nurse correlative being termed a nonphysician, a shared understanding of the awkward- ness of either term in supporting a sense of collegiality emerged. In stark contrast to Starfield’s (1992b) language of dependency flowing from “delegated medical func- tions,” nursing language stresses the need to avoid defi- nition by function or tasks when describing role. Orem (1995) stresses that a task orientation for nursing disallows the focus on the person. To define oneself as a nurse, the following questions must be answered:
• What do I do (scope of practice)?
• How do I do it (methods of practice, tasks)?
• Whom do I care for?
• Why do they need or want my care?
fte ANA social policy statement of 2015 reaffirmed col- laboration as a standard of practice. Although advanced practice nursing texts have consistently addressed the concept of collaborative practice, undergraduate nursing texts on professional practice have not historically ad- dressed collaboration. Often, the word is not even found in the index; and if it is, it has nearly always referred to collaboration between nursing practice and education or between types of nurses within the same setting. How- ever, this too is changing. A chapter in the 2002 text Pro- fessional Nursing Practice, “fte Nurse as Colleague and Collaborator,” noted, “changing models of health care have created a need for modification of traditional roles. Nurses and physicians have been especially affected by these changes and work more collaboratively” (Blais et al., 2002, p. 199).
In a spring 2001 report, The Health Care Workforce in
Ten States: Education, Practice and Policy (American Fed- eration of Teachers [AFT] Healthcare, 2001), 10 pilot states were studied regarding the status of their health- care workforce. Aspects compared were data collection



status and process, practice issues, influences, and pol- icies. In describing licensure and regulation of practice, the extent of physician supervision varied considerably among states and among types of providers. In one state, APN practice called for both “independent judgment” and “collaborative interaction with other healthcare pro- fessionals.” However, neither collaborative interaction nor other healthcare professionals was defined in their practice act (AFT Healthcare, 2001, p. 50). Although the effect of the enforced collaboration and supervision on APN prac- tice (noted in 9 of 10 states studied) was not addressed, re- searchers (AFT Healthcare, 2001, p. 2) affirmed that . . .
. . . the greatest opportunities for influencing the var- ious environments affecting the health workforce lie within state governments. States are the key actors in shaping these environments as they finance and gov- ern health profession education; license and regulate health profession practice and health insurance; pur- chase service; pay designated providers under Med- icaid programs; and often assume responsibility for

design and/or subsidy of programs providing incen- tives for health professionals to choose specialties and practice location.

Socialize Students to Communication Skills Needed for Collaborative Interactions
When education includes the process of establishing an interdisciplinary team, it helps to create a system for pro- moting collaborative practice and facilitates the use of es- sential communication skills. One point highly stressed is the insistence that interdisciplinary teams should be already delivering care and have a solidly positive prac- tice in place before integrating students into the teams (Hanson & Spross, 1996; Hughes, 2011; Norsen et al., 1995). Alberto and Herth (2009) explored in depth the history, benefits, and challenges of interprofessional collaboration in education and practice, offering an ex- cellent review of their experiences with collaboration in health-care education. Examples of interdisciplinary pro- fessional education initiatives may be seen in Table 8.2.



   Table 8.2	
Interdisciplinary Professional Education Initiatives

Project or ModelLocation or Clinical AreaFocusCitationInterdisciplinary educational initiativeVanderbilt UniversityMedical, APRN, pharmacy, and social work students learning togetherBuerhaus, 2010Simulation trainingFreestanding children’s hospitalA study to determine the level ofMessmer, 2008in the southeastern Unitedphysician–nurse collaborationStates with teams consistingin pediatrics using simulationof pediatric residents and fel-exerciseslows and nurse volunteersProposed transdisciplinary medi- cal, nursing, and health profes- sional simulation centerMultiple examples of models being tested in various clinical areas, nationally and abroadStudents from the health disciplines, nursing, health professions, and medicine who are exposed to the complexities of teamwork within a clinical settingGlasgow et al., 2010Continuing education in classroom and clinical settingsBaystate Health of MassachusettsStrengthening collegial relationshipsTrossman, 2014Simulation labsUniversity of Alabama, BirminghamStrengthening collegial relationshipsTrossman, 2014Annual emergency department “skills blitz” simulation exercisesCone Health of Greensboro, North CarolinaStrengthening collegial relationshipsTrossman, 2014


Group dynamics, role theory, organization theory, change theory, negotiation strategies, team interactions, networking, and focus on the need for organizational leadership for supporting interdisciplinary programs are key factors in these interdisciplinary educational initia- tives preparing students and enabling practitioners to function in a collaborative world.

COLLABORATIVE MODELS: EARLY
PIONEERS AND EMERGING MODELS

For clarity, many of these models are described as they were implemented with specific populations and in spe- cific settings. However, they are transferable to a variety of places where health care is practiced once the philoso- phy and concepts are extracted and understood.

Early Pioneers
Primary Nursing Model
A national project conducted by the National Joint Practice Commission (NJPC, 1981) required hospitals utilizing a primary nursing model of practice to demon- strate 100% registered nurse staffing, individual clinical decision making by the registered primary nurse, a joint practice committee with equal representation of provid- ers, an integrated patient record, and joint evaluation of patient care. fte structural elements of integrated re- cords; joint practice committees; and joint care review reflect the common goals, mutual concerns, and shared control identified as critical indicators of a high-level col- laborative practice (see Table 8.1). Primary nursing, “the performance of clinical nursing functions by registered nurses with minimal or no delegation of nursing tasks to others” (NJPC, 1981, p. 11), is considered essential for enabling the nurse to better enter into a collegial relation- ship with the physician. fte emphasis on the primary nurse role, coupled with the element of increased nurse responsibility for decision making, relates accountability directly with collegiality and individual clinical decision making by nurses and is considered to be a prerequisite for shared decision making—you cannot share what you do not have (Devereux, 1981; Sullivan, 1998). fte re- sults from the four participating hospitals were positive in relation to improved doctor–nurse communications,

increased mutual respect and trust between physicians and nurses, increased job satisfaction for physicians and nurses, and highly satisfied patients.
Differentiated Practice Model
In recent years, the cost effectiveness of the primary nurse model has been challenged based on the limited reality of achieving it amidst a nursing shortage. How- ever, newly developing models of differentiated practice have converted the “primary nurse” concept into that of a patient care coordinator (PCC) who assumes 24-hour accountability for specific patients. fte PCC, however, does not deliver all the care personally. Instead, a team of other nurses and ancillary help assume major responsi- bility for care delivery, each with specific roles and levels of accountability. Each nurse is paired with certain physi- cians and his or her patients, and trust and collaboration are more readily developed as nurse and physician work together. ftis collaborative system model of patient care delivery has reported higher levels of coordination, cost-effectiveness, and patient and provider satisfac- tion than previously seen in less collaborative models (Devaney et al., 2002; Koerner & Karpiuk, 1994).
Collaborative Practice Model in a Clinic Setting
A collaborative practice model established in the early part of 2000 in an inner-city clinic in Beirut, Lebanon, reported a positive impact on quality of care of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus that was nothing less than amazing (Arevian, 2005). fte researchers first identified four key elements essential for the model—“collaborative defining of the problems; joint goal setting and plan- ning; providing a continuum of self-management and support services; and maintaining active and sustained follow-up” (p. 446). In developing the model, they de- termined that thorough preparation of the professional team members would be an essential factor for success. In addition, they developed provider support systems, including standardized guidelines for care management; provided for patient education in illness-management skills; and provided consistent access to a single team member. fte development process proved to be very ef- fective because teams reported a high level of enthusiasm, cooperation, willingness to share expertise, and acknowl- edgment of skills of other colleagues. As one physician said, “We were treating each other like colleagues, with



mutually respectful relationships,” and another noted that he gained insights into “how much and how well the other team members contributed to patient care” (p. 449). Outcomes reported included improved docu- mentation, increased patient recruitment, and improved glycemic control as well as decreased cost of care. fte most amazing aspect of the clinic was the positive re- sponse of team members to each other’s skills and exper- tise in a Middle Eastern culture in which nurses are still considered as “handmaidens” to physicians. In addition, the positive patient response to active participation in their care was surprising in a Lebanese culture that en- courages “passive submission” to the physician authority figure (Arevian, 2005, p. 450). fte development process of this collaborative practice model can serve as an excel- lent template for clinics and provides additional proof of the value of interprofessional collaboration. Building on this concept, Nurse-Managed Health Clinics (NMHCs) were established by the PPACA to serve underserved populations. ftis grant program requires the clinics to be led by APNs who are associated with a school, college, university, or department of nursing, a federally quali- fied health center, social services agency, or independent nonprofit health agency (Haney, 2010).
Collaboration in Long-Term Care
For more than 30 years, collaborative practice models have been developing in long-term care (LTC). Collab- orative models in LTC as described by the AMDA (for- merly the American Medical Directors Association) Ad Hoc Work Group (2011) include different employment scenarios, such as the APN employed by the physician, self-employed, or employed by the nursing home; a spe- cialty APN collaborating with a specialty physician; and the care manager.
   fte positive impact of NP–physician partnerships in LTC has been reported in studies of the Nursing Home Demonstration Project and the Teaching Nurs- ing Home Project, among others. In the 1980s, two NPs developed the LTC model of care teams that focused on coordinated care of frail and older nursing home resi- dents (Kappas-Larson, 2008). ftey founded the Ever- care Company, whose facilities are now nationwide and whose model is used both in nursing homes and in the community where nurse–physician teams care for older people who are living independently at home. Seven

specific practice roles of Evercare NPs are collaborator, clinician, care manager or coordinator, coach or educa- tor, counselor, communicator, and cheerleader.
  fte NPs serve as the center of the interprofessional care team in which both physician and nurse are valued partners. It is required by Evercare that each NP estab- lish a positive relationship with his or her collaborating physician. As physicians become more aware of and com- fortable with the NP’s skill and expertise, they grow more supportive of the role. Active participation by physicians in LTC patient care is reported higher in Evercare pro- grams, perhaps because of their comfort with and confi- dence in their NP partner. Physicians have said that “one of the most important components of their experience with Evercare is the personalized and coordinated care patients receive, thanks in part to the quality of Evercare’s NPs and care managers” (Kappas-Larson, 2008, p. 135). Collaboration in LTC facilities should include other employees who are involved in patient care as well. For example, a recent educational program about heart fail- ure for certified nursing assistants (CNAs) in an LTC facility, designed and led by an NP, focused on CNA clinical education and CNA–nurse communication, especially in regard to recognizing and reporting vital resident information in a timely manner. It was stressed that the CNA be included in all quality improvement projects to “promote CNA input and maximize buy-in”
(Kim et al., 2016, p. 34).

Emerging Models of Shared Professional Practice
Shared Governance
Shared governance is a collaborative organizational model in which management and staff acknowledge that their interdependence and power is balanced equally on issues relating to nursing practice (Porter-O’Grady, 1992). One model of shared governance on an oncology unit focused on collaboration and mutually agreed-on goals between the CNS and the nurse manager. fte approach highlighted professional development, shared decision making, autonomy, use of evidence-based prac- tice, and creating a “culture of excellence for nursing staff through role modeling, smart allocation of resources and the development of standards of excellence” (Gaguski & Begyn, 2009, p. 385).



   In today’s changing health-care environment, the role of the APN is expanding to one of leadership within both hospital and clinical settings. Sonson notes that it is “important for nurse administrators to understand the various roles for APRNs and how to utilize them in health-care delivery systems, including shared gover- nance initiatives as a component of the Magnet® journey” (2013, p. 49). Developing a shared governance founda- tion for practice within a hospital or large clinic involves the development of unit practice councils (UPCs) led by DNP-prepared APNs, clinical practice leaders who can guide the expansion and improved outcomes in clinical practice throughout the organization. fte experience of the Billings Clinic is offered here as an example:
fte Billings Clinic of Billings, Montana, a large inte- grated health care organization of hospitals and clin- ics, is comprised of over 400 physicians and APNs serving in 50 specialty areas in Montana, northern Wyoming, and the western Dakotas. Problems for APNs included a lack of leadership role for APNs and variability in how they were used throughout the organization. In 2013 they began developing a Professional Practice Model with a coordinated sys- tem of councils within a shared governance model, one of which was an APN council. Part of the role of the APN council was to improve and standard- ize practice, support APN professional growth and assist in collaboration between APN practices and other provider groups. APNs have a place on lead- ership councils throughout the organization, and practice changes involving APNs are discussed first before the APN Council, much like other nursing councils. fte Billings Clinic leadership, including APNs, developed this shared governance model to assist them in retaining Magnet® Designation by the American Nurse Credentialing Center, first achieved in 2006–2010 and re-designated in 2011–2015 and 2016–2020. (Meunier & Oley, 2017)

Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs)
fte ACO is a collaboration among primary care and specialist clinicians, a hospital, and other health profes- sionals, accepting joint responsibility for both quality and cost of care provided to their patients. Under the PPACA, ACOs are an element of Medicare’s cost-saving

plan, and members share in any bonuses received from meeting cost saving targets. Both the number and size of ACOs have been increasing. fte number of ACOs rose from 220 in 2013 to 548 in 2018, while the average number of participating clinicians in AOCs increased from 263 to 653. fte number of nonphysician prac- titioners showed the greatest increase from 47 to 245 (Nyweide, 2020). Pilot projects are working on testing the ACO model with both Medicaid and private payers. Key benefits for nursing include more leadership and in- creased collaborative opportunities.
Medical/Health Homes
fte Patient-Centered Medical Home (PCMH) model is a move away from the traditional primary care model because it seeks to provide coordinated care through an interprofessional team of health-care providers. fte concept of a medical home is not new; it was in- troduced in 1967 by the American Academy of Pedi- atrics to better serve children with special health-care needs. fte PPACA served as an impetus for emerging community-based interdisciplinary and interprofes- sional teams. ftese teams must include physicians; have a patient-centered, whole person orientation; provide a broad scope of coordinated-care services and expanded access; and provide quality, cost-effective, and culturally appropriate care across the age spectrum. ftese require- ments aim to increase positive outcomes; reduce repeat hospitalizations; and promote effective, personalized, and timely access to care. Emerging models and pilot projects stress “care coordination” as the key to success to the medical home concept and offers nurses an excellent leadership opportunity for preparing teams to deliver “patient-centered care,” a core aspect of nursing practice (Schram, 2010; Swartwout et al., 2014).

Emerging Model of Shared Decision Making (SDM)
SDM is a collaborative model of health-care delivery in which patients actively participate in treatment de- cisions. fte model places the nurse in a key role as pa- tient educator, advocate, and facilitator of the exchange of information between patient and the health-care team as they work together to find a mutually acceptable treat- ment plan among patient, physician, nurses, and other



providers. McCarter et al. (2016) describes this model as the dominant delivery model in cancer nursing practice. An example of this model is the Patient Navigator program pioneered by Dr. Harold Freeman at Harlem Hospital to help eliminate barriers that members of minority communities encountered when seeking can- cer screening, diagnosis, treatment, and ongoing care. SDM can be either hospital or clinic based. At present, patient advocacy or navigation is not regulated in its own right, there is no national or state licensure or cre- dentialing, and the navigator is not necessarily a nurse. Hospital-based navigators are often nurses working for the hospital. Private navigator services may or may not be paid for by insurance or advocate funding and of- ten are not provided by nurses. One blog describes the navigator as one who “works with patients and families to help them at many points along the health-care con- tinuum: disease research, insurance problems, finding doctors, understanding treatment and care options, ac- companying them to visits, serving as coach and quar- terback of their health-care team, working with family members and caregivers, mobilizing resources, manag- ing medical paperwork and almost anything else you can think of” (Russell, 2013). fte role sounds similar to nursing, and more nurses and even physicians are be- coming private navigators or advocates. However, many models described in the literature stress a preference for navigators who are nonmedical or laypersons with inter- personal skills and some experience in service-oriented fields (de la Riva et al., 2016; Loskutova et al., 2016). Nurses need to understand the role and work with the navigators as lay members of the team. In addition, nurses might consider reshaping their clinical role to in-
corporate the advocate or navigator approach.

CREATE THE FUTURE

fte call for collaboration continues to accelerate, driven by consumer and insurer demands for high-quality care at low cost; the existence of fragmented, disorganized, impersonal, and inaccessible care; numerous reports and commissions recommending collaboration; and the demands of some accrediting agencies for collabora- tion (Bodenheimer, 2008; IOM, 2011; Maier & Aiken, 2016; Marshall, 2016; Zwarenstein & Bryant, 2000).

fte IOM Committee, in its call for the design of a new health-care system for the 21st century that better meets patient needs, recommended that health-care processes be redesigned in accordance with 10 new “rules” listed in Box 8.1 (IOM, 2001). fte rules speak to a system of care delivery focused on continuous healing relation- ships, shared knowledge and decision making with pa- tients, and cooperation among professional providers as reflected by active collaboration and communication, emphasizing cooperation in patient care as more im- portant than professional prerogatives and roles. ftis emphasis on teamwork is repeatedly stressed in the IOM report, The Future of Nursing (2011). Collaboration is considered intrinsic to nursing, the norm for profes- sional practice, and “a health care imperative” (Sullivan, 1998, p. 62). With health care increasingly provided in complex systems, the interactions of various providers are not only inevitable but also essential for high-quality holistic care. However, agreement on basic definitions of medical and nursing practice is the sine qua non of collaboration between the sets of providers.
During the tumultuous years of the mid-1990s,
amid national debates regarding comprehensive federal health-care reform, the leaders of the AMA and the ANA drafted the following joint definition of collaboration (ANA, 1998, p. 2):
Collaboration is the process whereby physicians and nurses plan and practice together as colleagues, work- ing interdependently within the boundaries of their scopes of practice with shared values and mutual ac- knowledgment and respect for each other’s contribu- tion to care for individuals, their families and their communities.
Although the ANA board of directors adopted this defi- nition in 1994, it has yet to be adopted by the AMA. In considering strategies for successful collaboration, per- haps revisiting this mutually developed definition with medical and nursing organizations and practice boards on a state-by-state basis will provide the groundswell for a truly meaningful sense of shared practice relationships. fte ongoing work of adopting the APRN Consensus Model state by state is a positive step in that direction (NCSBN, 2020; O’Grady & Ford, 2009).
   As we seek to accomplish independence of advanced nursing practice, we must at the same time strive to



box 8.1Ten Rules to Redesign and Improve CareRecommendation 4: Private and public purchas-	5. Evidence-based decision making. Patients should ers, health-care organizations, clinicians, and pa-		receive care based on the best available scien- tients should work together to redesign health-care		tific knowledge. Care should not vary illogi- processes in accordance with the following rules:		cally from clinician to clinician or from place
1. Care based on continuous healing relationships.	6. to place.
Patients should receive care whenever they need	Safety as a system property. Patients should be
it and in many forms, not just face-to-face vis-	safe from injury caused by the care system. Re- its. ftis rule implies that the health-care system	ducing risk and ensuring safety require greater should be responsive at all times (24 hours a	attention to systems that help prevent and mit-
day, every day) and that access to care should be	7. igate errors.
provided over the Internet, by telephone, and	The need for transparency. fte health-care sys-
by other means in addition to face-to-face visits.	tem should make information available  to
2. Customization based on patient needs and values.	patients and their families that allows them fte system of care should be designed to meet	to make informed decisions when selecting a the most common types of needs, but have the	health plan, hospital, or clinical practice, or capability to respond to individual patient	when choosing among alternative treatments. choices and preferences.	ftis should include information describing the
3. The patient as the source of control. Patients	system’s  performance on safety, evidence-based
should be given the necessary information and	8. practice, and patient satisfaction.
the opportunity to exercise the degree of con-	Anticipation of needs. fte health system should
trol they choose over health-care decisions that		anticipate patient needs rather than simply re- affect them. fte health system should be able	9. acting to events.
to accommodate differences in patient prefer-	Continuous decrease in waste. fte health system
ences and encourage shared decision making.	10. should not waste resources or patient time.
4. Shared knowledge and the free flow of infor-	Cooperation among clinicians. Clinicians and
mation. Patients should have  unfettered ac-	institutions should actively collaborate and cess to their own medical information and to	communicate to ensure an appropriate ex- clinical  knowledge.  Clinicians and patients	change of information and coordination of should  communicate  effectively and share	care.
information.From Institute of Medicine. (2001). Executive Summary (pp. 8–9).


collaborate with other professionals. fte right of in- dependent practice does not and should not preclude collaboration. Whether in institutional situations, com- munity clinics or rural setting, collaboration is a “health care imperative” (Sullivan, 1998). Collaboration is a

delicate balance between maintaining independence of practice, working as a colleague in a professional rela- tionship with other practitioners, sharing insights, and consulting with each other on aspects of practice to achieve the best possible care for those we serve.















Participation of the Advanced Practice Nurse in Health Plans and Quality Initiatives
Rita Munley Gallagher



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Demonstrate the potential for advanced practice nurses (APNs) to improve both patient experience and health plan (HP) profitability.
• Recommend skills needed for APNs to be successful in the managed care
environment.
• Detail the benefits of participation in quality reporting programs.
• Explain the barriers to autonomous practice by APNs inherent in the health-care delivery system.
• Illustrate the relevance of value-based purchasing (VBP) strategies to APNs.
• Identify national organizations engaged in quality efforts and the value of APN participation in quality initiatives.
• Present the benefits of integrating measurement into professional nursing practice
at all levels.
• Propose the utilization of data to mobilize consumer support for APN services.
• Detail APNs’ need for marketing skills.




157



INTRODUCTION

Advanced practice nurses (APNs) continue to be conspic- uous by their absence from health plan (HP) provider panels. In addition, their efforts have not been fully rec- ognized in activities within the national quality enter- prise. Is this because most APNs are employees? Are they reluctant to take on the full responsibility of the primary care provider role, fearful of accepting accountability, hes- itant to mobilize consumer support on their own behalf? Or, is it a more fundamental issue—an issue of respect?
   Today’s evolving health-care environment has trans- formed the way many health-care services are provided and compensated for. fte approach to health-care ser- vice delivery has undergone a significant alteration in both its contracting and reimbursement mechanisms. Fee-for-service is no longer the primary source of pricing but has been overtaken by prospective payment, global pricing, capitation, and value-based purchasing (VBP). Along with these changes has come a significant increase in financial risk to the provider. By taking on liability not only for service-delivery costs but also for level of use, providers have assumed roles historically reserved for insurance carriers. In addition, demonstration of practitioner accountability for quality has moved into the forefront of health-care delivery. More than 290,000 APNs (American Association of Nurse Practitioners [AANP], 2020)—and their numbers are growing—are carving out a larger role in delivering safe, effective, patient-centered, timely, efficient, equitable health care. ftis chapter focuses on the involvement of APNs within HPs and within the national quality enterprise and offers suggestions for increasing their visibility within both.
APNs possess the education and expert clinical
knowledge to practice in multiple settings. fte exper- tise of APNs serves to complement other practitioners within the health-care arena. Nurse practitioners (NPs) “focus on health promotion, disease prevention and health education and counseling, guiding patients to make smarter health and lifestyle choices. Since the NP role was created in 1965, more than 50 years of research has consistently demonstrated the excellent outcomes and high quality of care provided by NPs. fte body of literature supports the position that NPs provide care that is safe, effective, patient-centered, timely, effi- cient, equitable and evidenced based. Furthermore, NP

care is comparable in quality to that of their physician colleagues. Patients under the care of NPs have higher patient satisfaction, fewer unnecessary hospital readmis- sions, fewer potentially preventable hospitalizations and fewer unnecessary emergency room visits than patients under the care of physicians” (AANP, 2015). Still, APNs are often underutilized by health plans.

HEALTH PLANS


HPs have become the overseers and administrators of health-care services for most Americans. HPs are nearly ubiquitous, having assumed the management and con- trol of the overwhelming majority of health-care services provided throughout the entire United States. In 2018, a little over 90% of the U.S. population was covered under HPs; the majority (55.2%) were covered in commercial group plans with approximately 38% covered by Medi- care (17.6%) or Medicaid (20.5%). Yet, 8.9% remained uninsured (Congressional Research Service, 2020).
   HP leaders are in a position to improve both patient experience and the HP’s bottom line by including more NPs in a greater number of HP provider panels. APNs are highly cost effective. fteir care results in decreased hospital admissions, increased adherence to treatment protocols, and improved patient outcomes (Swan et al., 2015). fte number of APNs is increasing just as the number of physicians is decreasing, especially in medi- cally underserved areas. Furthermore, APNs are already caring for these vulnerable patient populations in large numbers (Buerhaus et al., 2015). However, APNs remain underrepresented in the aforementioned provider panels. Almost all HPs have some sort of managed care pro- gram to help control health-care costs. “Managed health care is a somewhat nebulous term referring to a system of health-care financing, benefits management and health- care delivery through contracted providers that tries to manage the cost of healthcare benefits, quality and access. Common features include a panel of contracted (or in some cases, employed) providers that is less than the entire universe of available providers, some type of limitations on benefits to members who use non-contracted provid- ers (unless authorized to do so) for non-emergency care, some type of authorization or precertification system, provider payment that is typically less than full charges,



and no-balance-billing for members” (Kongstvedt, 2019). At least in theory, managed care is designed to foster the effective, appropriate, and efficient monitoring of a specific population’s health. Managed care calls for providers to assume responsibility and accountability for the health-care needs of a specifically defined population while at the same time agreeing to accept the financial risk inherent in taking on that responsibility. In a man- aged care system, the insurer determines, under written standards, the medical necessity of medical services and directs care to the most appropriate setting so as to pro- vide high-quality care in the most cost-efficient manner. To control benefits, HPs require preauthorization of cer- tain services, careful review of payment of claims, and maintenance of a provider network. Each of these admin- istrative functions contributes to lowering the cost of care by managing benefits closely (Baucher, 2019).
In managed care, the burden of risk is shared. Unlike tra-
ditional indemnity plans in which the insurance company bears the financial risk and burden of enrollees requiring more complex and costly care, various incentive plans and capitation place the risk (and burden) on the managed care provider—whether that be a plan, an APN, a physician, a mental health provider, or another practitioner (Costanza, 2020). In addition to point-of-service (POS) plans, the most common types of HPs include health maintenance organizations (HMOs) and preferred provider organiza- tions (PPOs), a component of which are exclusive provider organizations. All of these plans, shown in Box 9.1, are grounded in provision of care to a specified cohort of en- rollees at an established per member/per month rate.



Types of Managed Care PlansHMOs usually only pay for care within the net- work. fte enrollee chooses a primary care pro- vider who coordinates most of the enrollee’s care.
PPOs generally pay more if the enrollee receives care within the network, but a PPO still pays a portion if the enrollee goes outside the network. POS plans let the enrollee choose between an
HMO and a PPO each time care is needed.  
fte initial goal of managed care was to improve qual- ity of care and population health by increasing use of preventive services while controlling costs (Namburi & Tadi, 2020). ftis mission has not always been readily apparent in practice or necessarily shared by all HPs. However, as systems of managed care have continued to develop, the goals have expanded to include, among others, a focus on outcomes analysis, development of practice guidelines, the creation of provider panels with a host of practitioners, and the coordination of service provision among providers (Pinkovskiy, 2020).
   State governments have been moving to increase their regulation of HPs. Many states have passed laws expand- ing patient rights; guaranteeing access to care; requiring POS options, including whistleblower clauses; and es- tablishing provider due-process protections. However, several self-insured HPs have successfully challenged state health insurance regulations under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) based on their contention that they are self-insured employee health benefit plans. ftese types of plans are exempt from many state regulations, such as any willing provider and nondiscrimination provisions, thereby hindering trans- parency (Fuse Brown & King, 2019).
With a background in patient education and certi-
fication in a specialty at the master’s or doctoral level, the APN is well equipped to provide high-quality care in a cost-effective environment (AANP, 2015). Yet APNs continue to be underrepresented on HP panels, thereby limiting enrollee access to their services. ftis gives rise to suspicions of lack of respect for APNs and for nursing overall. Managed care has become a way of life for all health-care practitioners and must include APNs.

Competencies Necessary in the Managed Care Environment
Clearly, managed care is here to stay. However, although the fit between its stated health promotion and disease prevention goals is in line with those of the APN, HPs place emphasis on the “bottom line” in an often incredi- bly competitive market. To prosper in such an arena, sev- eral skills are needed by APNs. ftese include marketing, advertising, and finance, which are generally considered as being beyond the components of (and, therefore, not included in) the basic nursing curriculum.



   To form an optimal system of “managed” care, a new paradigm of professional practice is needed. In this “new” system, the practitioner must be capable of integrating nursing’s traditional curing focus with an ability to manage the health of individual enrollees and the covered cohort overall. In addition to appropriate credentials, APNs must possess the following skills to be successful in managed care:
• Clinical  accountability
• Communication  skills
• Leadership skills
• Team-building abilities
• Negotiation and conflict resolution skills
• Ability to engage in quality management activities
• Financial acumen
APNs who see themselves as possessing these competen- cies can improve their chances of successfully negotiating a contract with an HP by doing the following:
• Highlighting communication; enhancing documen- tation; becoming familiar with the “ins and outs” of the contract
• Following through with commitments
• Educating HPs on the value—both quality value and efficiency value—of their services
• Improving fiscal and management system capacities
• Being creative, flexible, and willing to work with the HP to meet mutual goals
To operate successfully in the HP environment, it is cru- cial that APNs work collaboratively with case managers, identify gaps in service that they are capable of filling, and hone the skills necessary (see the previous list) to succeed in contracting with the HP as well as in securing needed benefits on behalf of their enrollees (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services [CMS], 2020).
   HPs are interested in a provider’s ability to furnish financial and cost data cross-referenced by client charac- teristics. ftese characteristics include clinical complex- ity, resource utilization, therapy and pharmaceutical use, length of stay, and outcome criteria. In addition, the APN must be able to detail the processes established to ensure quality improvement and outcomes of activities. Admin- istrative expertise is needed, and quality and financial reporting mechanisms must be in place. Operating stan- dards focused on efficacy and outcome measurement cri- teria along with practitioner performance evaluations are

also closely scrutinized by the HP (Anthem, Inc., 2018). At a minimum, it is assumed that all parties preparing to enter into a contract do so voluntarily and knowingly having read and fully understand the document. Failing to read the contract critically, as well as failure to have it reviewed by an attorney, can result in significant prob- lems for the APN at a later point in time.

Contracting With Health Plans
Several challenges are inherent in providing health-care services, which make the decision to enter into a con- tractual agreement with an HP particularly attractive and also potentially difficult. Such challenges may also result in a significant number of APNs continuing in the traditional role of employee, albeit with an HP as employer instead of the traditional hospital or nurs- ing home. In 2019, the majority (71.6%) of respon- dents to the AANP compensation survey were salaried, whereas 25.7% were paid an hourly rate and 2.7% were self-employed (AANP, 2019).
   If properly negotiated, employment contracts of- fer many protections. Nevertheless, when an APN does consider entering into a contract with an HP, numerous questions arise (Brown & Dolan, 2016): Does the HP need additional APNs in the desired geographic area? Is the HP planning to bid on an employer group whose employees heavily utilize your specialty? Do you offer any unique services that will benefit the HP and its members? ftese and other relevant issues must be clari- fied by the APN before contractual integration into any HP system. Clearly prospective planning is critical in the decision-making process preparatory to contracting with an HP. Box 9.2 provides tips for APNs who plan to con- tract with an HP.
APNs must know whether the HP with which they
are negotiating does the following:
• Confronts the realities of providing adequate care to clients
• Supports strong research and development programs
• Promotes health education and disease prevention
• Strongly integrates the perspectives of relevant en- rollee groups
• Promotes collaborative care
• Supports patient engagement





     Tips for Contracting With Health Plans
Following are six tips for successful contracting with a health plan (HP):
1. Do your homework! Know as much as possi- ble about the plan before you start to negotiate a contract. If you can, talk with other practi- tioners already on the provider panel.
2. Be a tough but fair negotiator up front and then a team player once you have signed on. If you want to make changes in the contract, do it before signing, not after.
3. Evaluate the “attitude” of the plan and cultivate a relationship with its officials. Do not expect plans to improve after you have signed on.
4. Clarify ambiguous language. Refine issues pro- spectively rather than trying to negotiate sub- stantive changes after signing. Start with the less important issues when negotiating. It is important to know what you want and to know your limits.
5. Determine if the HP requires specific processes in relation to the transfer of a patient.
6. Finally, seek competent legal advice to avoid contracting pitfalls. fte health plan does.
• Collects and disseminates accurate data
• Advocates for financing reforms that better fund pri- mary care
• Does a thorough job of attending to psychosocial fac-
tors (of both enrollees and practitioners)
• Promotes palliative care, when appropriate
• Educates the public on the benefits of a healthy lifestyle
• Incentivizes APNs commensurate with the risks they
accept

Reimbursement
When Medicare and Medicaid were first enacted in 1965 by amendment of the Social Security Act, few nurses were practicing independently; thus, no provisions were made

for direct payment to them. Enactment of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) of 1989 allowed for Medicaid coverage of services by family NPs and pediat- ric NPs and extended Medicare Part B coverage to NPs in skilled nursing facilities only (with no provision for coverage of services provided by clinical nurse special- ists [CNSs]) and with the payment going to the facil- ity, not directly to the NP. Medicare Part B coverage was extended to services provided by both NPs and CNSs in nonmetropolitan statistical areas (i.e., rural areas) by OBRA ’90, establishing NPs and CNSs as Medicare pro- viders. fte 1990s saw several attempts by the American Nurses Association (ANA) and others to expand cover- age for APN services, culminating with the signing of the Balanced Budget Act (BBA) by President William Jeffer- son Clinton. fte BBA extended reimbursement oppor- tunities for APNs by removing geographical and practice site restrictions (ANA, 2017). However, significant bar- riers to full and autonomous practice for APNs remain firmly entrenched in the health-care delivery system. Federal (and many state) laws do not provide adequate support for the removal of barriers to practice for APNs that are created by policymakers, health-care institutions, insurance payers, or HPs. ftese barriers include denial of claims from third-party payers; failure to include APNs on preferred provider panels; institutional and provider policies that inhibit the objective and accurate assess- ment of the quality of care and benefits provided by use of APNs; and institutional and provider limitations on APN scope of practice (SOP), including contracting with HPs. Although the BBA did allow for direct Medicare reimbursement for services provided by NPs and CNSs regardless of geographical location or practice setting, it was at only 85% (80% for CNSs) of the amount that Medicare reimbursed physicians. ftis inequity resulted in continued billing for APN services as “incident to” the physician (i.e., allowing a service provided by an APN to be billed at 100% of the fee schedule when the physician is on-site and available for consultation, if necessary) add- ing to the “invisibility” of APNs (MedPAC Staff, 2019). Also of relevance is Medicare’s payment system phi- losophy, which has historically rewarded quantity rather than quality of care, providing neither incentive nor support to improve health-care quality. Conversely, the VBP system links payment more directly to the qual- ity of care provided. ftis strategy has transformed the



payment system by rewarding providers for delivering high-quality, efficient clinical care. fte CMS launched its VBP initiative through several public reporting pro- grams; demonstration projects; pilot programs; and voluntary efforts in hospitals, physicians’ offices, nurs- ing homes, home health services, and dialysis facilities. ftere is administrative as well as evidentiary support for VBP. Higher spending does not equate with higher qual- ity, and VBP is working to improve quality and avoid unnecessary costs.
   In 2006, Congress passed Public Law 109-171, the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 (DRA), which under Section 5001(b) authorized CMS to develop a plan for VBP for Medicare hospital services commencing with fiscal year 2009 when CMS added additional condi- tions to the hospital-acquired conditions provision (DRA Section 5001[c]). Scoring in the hospital inpa- tient VBP program is based on whether a provider meets or exceeds the performance standards established with respect to selected measures. In adopting this program, CMS rewards hospitals based on actual quality perfor- mance, rather than simply reporting data for those mea- sures (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [USDHHS], 2020). fterefore, CMS (and several other third-party payers) no longer make higher payments for selected conditions such as complications of surgery or hospital-acquired infections that were not present at the time of hospital admission (CMS, 2020).
Although early VBP strategies were focused solely on
hospitals, there are also aspects directed to home health care and to practitioners, including those related to re- source use that were particularly relevant to APNs. On December 20, 2006, Public Law (PL) 109-432, the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006 (TRHCA), was signed. Division B, Title I, Section 101 of the law au- thorized the establishment of a physician quality report- ing program by CMS. fte Physician Quality Reporting System (PQRS) (initially the Physician Quality Report- ing Initiative [PQRI]) was a quality reporting program that encouraged individual eligible professionals (EPs), including APNs and group practices, to report infor- mation on the quality of care to Medicare. Since 2007, CMS relied heavily on the PQRS to increase clinician accountability and to facilitate the improvement and de- livery of high-quality care for Medicare beneficiaries. By reporting on PQRS quality measures, APNs quantified

how often they met a particular quality metric. In 2015, the program began applying a negative payment ad- justment to those who did not satisfactorily report data on quality measures for Medicare Part B Physician Fee Schedule (MPFS)-covered professional services. APNs, and other eligible professionals, who reported satisfac- torily avoided the PQRS negative payment adjustment. In 2015, Congress passed the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (MACRA), a bill designed for Medicare payment reform, aimed at lowering health-care costs and improving the quality of patient care. MACRA ended the Sustainable Growth Rate (SGR) formula and required CMS to implement a new incentive program called the Quality Payment Program (QPP) consisting of two payment tracks: the Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) and the Advanced Alternative Payment Model (AAPM). fte MIPS combines the PQRS, the Value-based Payment Modifier (Value Modifier), and the Electronic Health Record (EHR) Incentive Program into one performance-based payment system. fte last program and reporting year for the PQRS was 2016, and data reported in 2016 affected any negative payment ad- justments applied in 2018 and overlapped with the 2017 implementation of MIPS under the Quality Payment
Program (TXCIN, 2019).
  fte Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PL 111-148) (ACA) linked payment to the quality of patient outcomes and called for transforming the health-care delivery system, in part through VBP, to fos- ter improvement in the quality and efficiency of health care. fte ACA also allowed nurse practitioners and clin- ical nurse specialists to order post-hospital extended care services. Increased reimbursement for care provided by certified nurse-midwives (CNMs) was implemented, and NPs were authorized to write orders for patients’ hospice services. Yet, a decade after its enactment, the various and sundry provisions of the ACA include suc- cesses, failures, and mixed bags as they relate to health policy and its impact on APNs (McDonough, 2020).
In addition to the potential impact on reimburse-
ment, participation in quality activities is important because it can improve health care. Health-care profes- sionals, including APNs, can participate in several quality activities, including those sponsored by CMS. fte CMS programs are voluntary activities that indicate health-care professionals and group practices have a commitment to



quality care. In addition to Hospital Compare and the Value Based Programs, included among the myriad of CMS and Health and Human Services (HHS) qual- ity programs are the following: Home Health Quality Reporting, Hospital-Acquired Condition Reduction Program, Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program (HRRP), Post-Acute Quality Initiatives, Quality Im- provement Organizations (CMS, 2019). Clearly, CMS has significant interest in quality, and showing a commit- ment to quality is the first step in achieving quality care.

Advanced Practice Nurse Participation in Health Plans
Great strides have been made in recent years to es- tablish APNs as independent practitioners providing health-care services. Health-care consumers are ac- cepting APNs’ practices more widely than previously. Research has continued to demonstrate over time that APNs have established and built on a record of deliver- ing high-quality health care. Despite this fact, there are continuing indications that APNs face significant barri- ers in the health-care marketplace, including the absence of full access to HP provider panels. Despite the 2012 creation of the Council for Affordable Quality Health Care Universal Provider Datasource, designed to sim- plify the provider credentialing process, APNs continue to experience significant barriers in several areas, from navigating the credentialing process with HPs, to inclu- sion on HP provider panels, to even being listed in HP provider directories. fte result of these barriers is that consumers’ choice of providers is limited. Furthermore, the APN’s role is relegated to employee in many cases, as opposed to that of independent contractor, as is the case of most other classes of practitioners. In addition to bar- riers to inclusion on HP panels, insurers and employers have also added arbitrary restrictions to APNs’ practices such as adding physician supervision or needless patient record cosignatory requirements. ftese requirements are not necessarily in adherence with state practice laws and increase the cost of APNs’ services, thereby creating dis- incentives to employers and consumers to use APNs.
A secondary issue is that there is little data collection
regarding the role of APNs in HPs. Most HMOs do not have formal methods for estimating and reporting non- physician provider care, thus making it difficult to track

APN use, efficiency, quality, and credentialing. As health care transitions to a value-based reimbursement model, nursing documentation in electronic health record (EHR) and other health IT systems will increasingly be used to demonstrate nursing’s contribution to that value. Nursing documentation can also be used to measure the contributions of nurses to improvements in individual and population health outcomes, patient safety, opera- tional efficiency, and clinical effectiveness. Today, unfor- tunately, nursing’s contribution to the health and care of individuals and communities is difficult to measure and often invisible. ftis lack of visibility is due, in part, to the absence of a unique identifier for nurses. fte iden- tification of clinicians who submit health-care claims is made possible by the national provider identifier (NPI). Although available, this capability is used by only a small percentage of the four million nurses in practice today (Sensmeier et al., 2020).
fte practice environment in the states in which they
are chartered influences the policies of HPs. fte legal definition of APN SOP, the type of physician collabo- ration required (or not required), prescription-writing authority, and state insurance laws may all affect the reimbursement and use of APNs. As health-care deliv- ery systems evolve into increasing numbers of multistate HPs, the procedures and policies affecting APNs are not always clear. In some cases, multistate corporations may elect to establish their own sets of rules instead of following state law. Multistate policies tend to dimin- ish use of the separate states’ APN scopes of practice, sometimes substituting stricter physician collaboration policies or limiting nurses’ prescriptive writing author- ity to HP formularies. Yet, inconsistent application and interpretation of state insurance law can adversely affect reimbursement and HP plan inclusion of APNs. To lend conformity and simplify regulatory compliance, HPs have generally resorted to application of the most rigorous (and hence most restrictive) rules promul- gated among the states in which they provide services. fte “Nondiscrimination of Health Care” section of the ACA (Section 2706) states that an insurer “shall not dis- criminate with respect to participation under the plan or coverage against any health care provider who is acting within the scope of that provider’s license or certifica- tion under applicable state law.” APNs must continue to direct their efforts toward ensuring that additional



states enact such nondiscrimination legislation and that HPs allow them the recognition they so richly deserve. Whether the APN intends to work as an employee of an HP or to seek inclusion on an HP’s provider panel by contracting with one, there is a need to develop a base of consumer support.
  fte issue is not one of APNs’ competence or of the quality of the care they provide. Decades of reports have documented the high quality of NP practice (AANP, 2015). Nurses have topped Gallup’s honesty and eth- ics ranking every year but one since they were added to the list in 1999. (fte exception is 2001, when fire- fighters were included on the list on a one-time basis, shortly after the September 11 terrorist attacks. Fire- fighters earned a record-high 90% honesty and ethics rating in that survey.) With an 85% honesty and ethics rating—tying their high point—nurses have no serious competition atop the Gallup ranking (Reinhart, 2020). Yet, it has been said that nurses—not just APNs but all nurses—are invisible in health care (Davis, 2017). How- ever, that perspective is changing. A 2002 poll commis- sioned by Johnson and Johnson found that only 25% of those polled had ever heard of an NP (Johnson & Johnson Poll, 2002, p. 14). Conversely, most respon- dents (90%) to a later survey knew about NPs and the majority had seen an NP for their care. Patients “ex- pressed a strong appreciation for the ongoing comfort that their NPs offered to them, which was based not on emotional platitudes, but on competent care and infor- mation provision over the course of their treatment” (Stahlke et al., 2017). Nevertheless, the skills of many APNs remain underutilized.
As the ANA and the state nurses associations con-
tinue to advocate for the right of APNs to fully practice within their scope without arbitrary barriers, physi- cians have stepped up efforts to confine the practice of APNs. For decades, organized medicine has fos- tered comprehensive grassroots and media campaigns to promote supervised, collaborative practice between physicians and APNs and has increased its public op- position to the expanded scope and independent prac- tice of APNs with one organization even going so far as to eliminate the allied health category of membership (Mayer, 2019).
   One of the assaults of organized medicine was (and continues to be) directed at APNs practicing in the

Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), which granted full practice authority to APNs when they are acting within the scope of their VA employment. Full practice author- ity helps optimize access to VA health care by permit- ting APNs to assess, diagnose, prescribe medications, and interpret diagnostic tests. ftis action expanded the pool of qualified health-care professionals authorized to provide primary health care and other related health-care services to the full extent of their education, training, and certification to veterans without the clinical su- pervision of a physician. All VA APNs are required to obtain and maintain current national certification. Or- ganized medicine decried the proposal because, accord- ing to the American Medical Association (AMA), “it runs counter to physician-led, team-based care, which it called the best approach to improving quality” (Lowes, 2016). In late 2017, the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) issued a directive permitting full practice author- ity (FPA) for three roles of APNs when they are acting within the scope of their VA employment: certified nurse practitioners (CNPs), CNSs, and CNMs. fte directive covered only those roles and, therefore, certified regis- tered nurse anesthetists (CRNAs) are not covered by the directive (Department of Veterans Affairs Veterans Health Administration, 2017).
Yet another strategy that has been put forth by or-
ganized medicine is advocating for the relaxation of antitrust laws as they apply to health-care professionals. Legislation has also been introduced on both the federal and state levels to provide collective bargaining rights for health-care professionals. Only those employees deemed nonsupervisory under the National Labor Relations Act are accorded the right to collectively bargain; however, these legislative proposals would provide physicians the right to enter into joint negotiations with insurance companies to work out payment arrangements, clinical practice conditions, and more. Such activity is currently forbidden under state and federal antitrust laws and is considered anticompetitive collaboration among com- petitors. In some instances, the courts have held that such collaboration on prices and market access are illegal boycotts. Changes in law being advocated by physician organizations would not only allow negotiation, but also would weaken the ability of the APN to prove antitrust violations by physician competitors, thereby ignor- ing their ability to take part equally in the competitive



managed care arena regardless of the quality of the care they provide.
   Examples of other barriers include limitations on pre- scriptive authority, such as the ability to prescribe only a 30-day supply of Schedule II drugs, and opposition to removal of the APN-to-physician ratio. “ftis high de- gree of variation across the states for APN regulation has spotlighted the need to ensure that regulation serves the public, promotes public safety, and does not present un- necessary barriers to patients’ access to care” (O’Grady, 2008, p. 8).

NATIONAL QUALITY EFFORTS

Nursing is active in all aspects of NQF efforts on steer- ing committees and their technical advisory panels, the National Priorities Partnership, the Consensus Standards Advisory Committee (CSAC), and the NQF board of directors. fte central activity of the NQF is the endorse- ment of performance measures as “voluntary” consensus standards and the identification of gaps in health-care quality research.
   Voluntary consensus standards, although relatively new in the health-care arena, are not new to other in- dustries. Moreover, since passage of the National Tech- nology Transfer and Advancement Act of 1995 (Public Law 104-113), voluntary consensus standards have legal

 		standing. fte voluntary consensus process, even in the

fte public’s concerns about error and patient safety to- gether with the continuing “quest for quality” has created renewed responsibility and accountability for the outcomes of patient care. fte National Quality Forum (NQF), a private, nonprofit, voluntary, consensus standard setting organization composed of more than 400 organizations (including several nursing organizations, the first of which was the ANA) and individuals from federal and state gov- ernments and private sector entities is prominent in the national quality arena. fte NQF is governed by a board of directors representing health-care consumers, purchasers, providers, HPs, and experts in health services research. fte NQF board also includes representatives from four federal agencies: the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the CMS, and the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) (NQF, 2020c).
fte mission of the NQF is to be the trusted voice
driving measurable health improvements so that every person experiences high-value care and optimal health outcomes. fte NQF works to realize its goals by:
• Measuring performance and driving evidence-based improvements
• Promoting person-centered care with the intention of
making health care work for every person
• Advancing the transition to value by promoting effi- cient, appropriate, person-centered care
• Achieving health equity while improving health
outcomes
• Responding to national priorities by collaborating to- ward better health outcomes (NQF, 2020a, 2020b).

face of strict requirements as to periods and transpar- ency, is timelier than is the federal rule-making process. One key component of the act is the obligation of the federal government to use voluntary existing consensus standards, thus encouraging the federal government to take part in the NQF process. Federal agency involve- ment in the NQF serves to encourage both public and private purchasers, accrediting bodies, practitioners and providers, and the public to also take part.
   Early on, the NQF recognized the value of nursing to health-care quality. fte NQF nursing care perfor- mance measures project established consensus on a set of evidence-based measures for evaluating the performance of nursing in acute care hospitals (NQF, 2007). It also addressed the implementation of those measures within health-care organizations to improve nursing care and patient outcomes and designated a subset of measures that are appropriate for public reporting (such as on the Web site Hospital Compare, which was developed by the Hospital Quality Alliance [HQA] in which the ANA was a principal).
fte HQA developed and launched Hospital Com-
pare to provide information to the public on hospital quality. fte HQA worked to increase hospitals’ volun- tary participation in public reporting and to expand the set of quality measures being reported. fte information on Hospital Compare helps patients determine how often individual hospitals provide the specific care that most patients should receive for certain conditions, such as giving heart attack patients an aspirin on arrival at a hospital. Although only a limited number of nursing measures are included in Hospital Compare, the sheer



number of nurses and their primacy in caregiving are compelling reasons for measuring their contribution to patients’ experiences and the outcomes that are attained (NQF, 2007). For more about the value of measuring nursing care, see Box 9.3.
   Nurses must be at the forefront of the mission to re- duce suffering and deliver patient-centered care. By pro- viding a national database for examining relationships between nursing and patient outcomes, the National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI), orig- inally developed by the ANA and later acquired by Press Ganey, Inc., delivers evidence to support the importance of investments in nursing strategy. As a leading nursing quality-improvement program, the NDNQI advances the vital efforts of nursing to help achieve higher qual- ity and more coordinated care through a robust national database of nursing-sensitive quality indicators and lead- ing job satisfaction and practice environment registered nurse (RN) surveys (Press Ganey, 2019). For quality measures related specifically to nursing, see Box 9.4.

Advanced Practice Nurse Participation in Quality Initiatives
In addition to the NQF-endorsed nursing-sensitive measures, other clinician-level quality measures are of relevance to APNs, including those developed by the Physician Consortium for Performance Improvement (PCPI), convened more than a decade ago by the AMA. Its goal is to improve patient health and safety by:
• Identifying and developing evidence-based clinical performance measures and measurement resources that enhance the quality of patient care and foster accountability
• Promoting the implementation of effective and rele-
vant clinical performance improvement activities
• Advancing the science of clinical performance mea- surement and improvement
Consortium activities are carried out through cross- specialty work groups established to develop perfor- mance measures from evidence-based clinical guidelines for select conditions. Membership is open to any or- ganization or individual who is committed to health- care quality improvement or patient safety and who participates in the development, review, dissemination,

or implementation of performance measures and mea- surement resources. fte PCPI balances its work efforts among new measure development, maintenance and enhancement, specifications, measure testing, and im- plementation. New measure topics are reviewed and selected against criteria including addressing gaps and unexplained variations in care, quality improvement, pa- tient safety, appropriateness of care, and key priorities of the current health-care environment. fte multiple step process for measure development begins with a review of evidence and selection of a work group and continues through public comment and member voting. Specifi- cations and eMeasures (standardized performance mea- sures specified in the accepted standard health quality measure format) are developed for implementation into an EHR. fte PCPI follows a rigorous, evidence-based, and multidisciplinary measure-development process that has been refined and standardized since its incep- tion. fte process combines staff expertise in measure- development methodology with the clinical expertise of multispecialty, multidisciplinary Technical Expert Panels (TEPs) to develop measures that lead to improved health outcomes for patients. fte PCPI develops specifications for multiple data source implementations with an em- phasis on specifications for electronic data sources, in- cluding EHRs and clinical registries. fte PCPI brings expertise in the development of health quality measures format (HQMF) electronic clinical quality measure (eCQM) technical specifications in accordance with na- tionally accepted and adopted standards, including use of the Quality Data Model (QDM) and Clinical Quality Language (CQL). Since 2000, the PCPI has developed over 300 clinical quality measures across 47 clinical top- ics (PCPI Foundation, 2019). For examples of quality measures relevant to APNs, see Box 9.5.
Nurses are the primary caregivers in all health-care
settings. As such, they are critical to the provision of high-quality care. “Nurses can change the landscape of quality and significantly reduce injury and death due to harm caused by errors. . . . More and more, as providers are subject to financial penalties for poor care, nurses will be both held accountable and also looked to for provid- ing high quality care” (Johnson et al., 2017). All nurses must have thorough evidence-based knowledge of the impact of the care they provide on the outcomes that pa- tients experience. Measurement must be integrated into



Box 9.3The Value of Measuring Nursing CareTo increase the value of information provided to	3. Measures of quality have been fully developed, consumers regarding the quality of nursing care		are in use, and have been previously vetted. fte by nursing-sensitive measures, interested parties		endorsement of the nursing-sensitive measures should focus on the following points:		by the NQF was an initial (albeit significant)
1. Nurses represent the largest single group of	step toward standardized measurement of nurs- health-care professionals.	ing care, detailing its relationship to the quality
• RNs held about 3.1 million jobs in 2018	(and efficiency) of health care.
(Bureau of Labor Statistics [BLS], 2019).	• Nursing care is integral to inpatient care and
• Because of the sheer number of nurses and	is uniquely delivered in hospital settings. fte
their contribution to the inpatient experi-	sheer number of nurses and their primacy in ence, measuring hospital  quality without	caregiving are compelling reasons for mea- measuring nursing’s contribution seems for-	suring their contribution to patients’ expe- eign to most stakeholders (NQF, 2007).	riences and the outcomes that are attained
2. Decades of evidence demonstrate nursing’s im-	4. (NQF, 2007).
pact on the provision of care that is safe, effective,	ftere has been a public call for information
patient centered, timely, efficient, and equitable:	about nursing care quality.
• RNs play key roles in hospitals’ systems for	• Enhancing the initial nursing-sensitive mea-
early detection of threats to patient safety		sure set by including additional measures and for prompt remedial intervention (Cho	• will increase the overall value of the set.
et al., 2016).	Consumers will benefit from information
• ftere are similar or better patient outcomes			regarding the impact of nursing care as they associated with NP-led care compared with	5. E make decisions regarding care. stimulates physician-led care (Smigorowsky et al., 2020).		vidence exists that public reporting
• NP-led care is also associated with increased	quality improvement and choice.
patient satisfaction, longer consultations, and	• Public reporting of hospital-safety data leads possibly higher return visits. ftere is no differ-		to meaningful reductions in the clinical area ence between NPs and physicians for hospital		reported on (Chiu et al., 2019).
admissions,  emergency department visits,	6. Measuring and publicly reporting health-care
number of prescriptions filled, and number of	quality information results in higher-quality tests ordered (Smigorowsky et al., 2020).	care for patients. ftere is agreement among
• Increasing RN staffing could reduce costs	diverse health-care stakeholders that the  NQF-
and improve patient care by reducing unnec-	endorsed nursing-sensitive measures should essary deaths and reducing days in the hospi-	be incorporated into national and state hospi- tal (Aiken & Sloane, 2020).	tal performance measurement and reporting
• When nurse workload is above the optimal	activities.
level, the likelihood of patient mortality in-	• Interviews were conducted with nearly creases 43% (Zolot, 2018).		three dozen national health-care, hospital,
• Lower nurse staffing and increased nursing	and nursing leaders, principals of nurs-
workload are associated  with ventilator-	ing performance measurement efforts, associated    pneumonia   and   mortality	and hospital representatives to determine (Jansson et al., 2019).	their  interest  in  and  use  of  the NQF’s(continued)



Box 9.3The Value of Measuring Nursing Care—cont’dnursing-sensitive measures. Recommenda-of nursing’s key role in quality. Amongtions derived from the data gathered andthese recommendations is a call topublished by the NQF (2007) point tohealth-care leaders to fully integrate theseveral complementary and incrementalnursing-sensitive measures into nationalactions that can be collectively undertakenand state hospital performance measure-by health-care stakeholders to advancement and reporting initiatives, including,hospital performance measurement andbut not limited to, Hospital Compareaccelerate our collective understanding(NQF, 2007; USDHHS, 2020).


Box 9.4Comprehensive Nursing-Sensitive Quality MeasuresStructure	• Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract Infections
• Nurse Turnover	• (CAUTI)
• Patient Volume and Flow	Central Line Catheter Associated Blood Stream
• Admissions, Discharges and Transfers (ADT)	• Infections (CLABSI)
• Emergency Department ftroughput	• Hospital Readmissions
• Patient Contacts	• Multidrug-Resistant Organisms (MDRO)
• RN Education/Specialty Certification	• C. difficile Infections
• Staffing and Skill Mix*	• MRSA Infections
• Workforce Characteristics	• Pain Impairing Function
Patient Falls*
Process	• Pediatric Peripheral Intravenous Infiltrations
• Care Coordination	• Perioperative Clinical Measure Set
• Device Utilization	• Patient Burns
• Pain Impairing Function	• Surgical Errors
• Patient Falls*	• Unplanned Postoperative Transfers/Admissions
• Pressure Injuries	• Pressure Injuries
• Pediatric Pain Assessment/Intervention/	• Ventilator-Associated Events (VAE) Reassessment (AIR) Cycle	• Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia (VAP)
• Restraints	RN Survey Options
Structure, Process, and Outcome
Outcome	• RN Survey with Job Satisfaction Scales
• Assaults by Psychiatric Patients	• RN Survey with Practice Environment Scale
• Assaults on Nursing Personnel	(PES)**Includes National Quality Forum-endorsed measures (Press Ganey, 2019).



Box 9.5Physician Consortium for Performance Improvement: Quality Measures Relevant to APNsPhysician Consortium for Performance Improve-	13. Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibi- ment (PCPI) measurement descriptions and spec-		tor or Angiotensin Receptor Blocker (ARB) fter- ifications are available for the following clinical		apy for Left Ventricular Systolic Dysfunction topics and conditions:
Hepatitis C
Care Transitions	14. One-Time Screening for Hepatitis C Virus
1. Reconciled Medication List Received by Dis-	(HCV) for Patients at Risk
charged Patients	15. Annual Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) Screening for
2. Timely Transition of Transition Record	Patients Who Are Active Injection Drug Users
3. Transition  Record  with Specified Elements	16. Appropriate Screening Follow-up for Patients Received by Discharged Patients (Emergency		Identified with Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) Department Discharge)		Infection
4. Transition Record with Specified Elements
Received by Discharged Patients (Inpatient	Major Depressive Disorder—Adult
Discharges)	17. Adult Major Depressive Disorder (MDD):
Chronic Stable Coronary Artery Disease	Suicide Risk Assessment
5. Beta-Blocker fterapy—Prior Myocardial In-	Major Depressive Disorder—Child
farction (MI) or Left Ventricular Systolic Dys-	and Adolescent
function (LVEF less than 40%)	18. Child and Adolescent Major Depressive Disor-
Dementia	der (MDD): Suicide Risk Assessment
6. Cognitive Assessment	Oncology
Eye Care	19. Breast Cancer: Hormonal fterapy for Stage
7. Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma (POAG): Op-	I (T1b)-IIIC Estrogen Receptor/Progesterone tic Nerve Evaluation	Receptor (ER/PR) Positive Breast Cancer
8. Cataracts: Complications within 30 Days Fol-	20. Colon Cancer: Chemotherapy for AJCC Stage
lowing Cataract Surgery Requiring Additional	III Colon Cancer Patients
Surgical Procedures	21. Medical and Radiation—Pain Intensity Quantified
9. Cataracts: 20/40 or Better Visual Acuity within	Preventive Care and Screening
90 Days Following Cataract Surgery
10. Diabetic  Retinopathy: Documentation of	22. Tobacco Use: Screening and Cessation Presence or Absence of Macular Edema and		Intervention
Level of Severity of Retinopathy	23. Unhealthy Alcohol Use: Screening and Brief
11. Diabetic Retinopathy: Communication with	Counseling
the Physician Managing Ongoing Diabetes	24. Influenza Immunization
Care	Prostate Cancer
Heart Failure	25. Avoidance of Overuse of Bone Scan for Stag-
12. Beta-Blocker fterapy for Left Ventricular Sys-	ing Low Risk Prostate Cancer Patients tolic Dysfunction (LVSD)


professional nursing practice at all levels, including the practice of APNs, and not simply considered a separate activity.

RECOGNITION AND CONSUMER SUPPORT

APNs are prepared by education and certification to as- sess, diagnose, and manage patient problems, order tests, and prescribe medications. ftey do the following:
• Provide high-quality health-care services
• Diagnose and treat a wide range of health problems
• Stress both care and cure, using a unique approach
• Focus on health promotion, disease prevention, health education, and counseling
• Assist patients to make wise health and lifestyle choices
Simply put, APNs engage in many of the care prac- tices that patients are seeking. APNs focus primarily on health promotion and disease prevention—factors fre- quently overlooked by traditional primary care provid- ers. ftey have significant experience in both the acute and ambulatory care arenas. ftese abilities coupled with APNs’ possession of case management skills make them ideal for involvement in HPs not merely as employees but as fully credentialed members of the HP’s provider panel. Why, then, are HPs not clamoring to engage their services? How can APNs increase HPs’ demand for their services? In short, how can APNs market themselves (and their advanced practice roles) to both the HP and its enrollees?
Although continuing emphasis is placed on quality,
managed care’s focus on reduction of costs has often resulted in a type of “managed competition” in which enrollees’ benefits are restricted through limitation of their access to a variety of providers. It is within this trap that APNs frequently find themselves. To flourish in the managed care environment, APNs must market them- selves to the HP and to enrollees.
   Marketing begins with a survey of the desires, needs, and expectations of the “customer,” which in managed care is the enrollee. Armed with that information, APNs should then structure a plan to meet those needs. Be- cause most APNs practice in a specialty area, the mar- keting plan should focus on the provision of related services, known as a market segment. An APN can choose

to focus on a population with a single condition (e.g., in- dividuals with insulin-dependent diabetes), a specific en- rollee need (e.g., rehabilitation following amputation), or a particular population (e.g., older adults). A primary decision centers on whether to engage in provision of services to a single population, a variety of populations, or to all plan enrollees.
   Marketing principles are sometimes referred to as the “four Ps”: product, price, promotion, and place (Twin, 2019). fte first “P,” product, encompasses the specialty practice services that APNs provide amplified by health promotion and disease prevention skills. fte APN’s product is self-evident. ftorough understanding of the second “P,” price, is essential to the success of the APN, be it within an HP or in independent practice. Although the marketplace itself has a significant impact on demand for an APN’s services as well as on how much it is willing to pay, the APN is the final arbiter regarding price. It is critical that the APN has full knowledge of the costs of all the components of the services delivered, not just personal compensation. fte most difficult “P” for many nurses, not just APNs, to engage in is promo- tion. Nurses do not usually excel at “tooting their own horns.” Self-promotion, or marketing, is unfamiliar to most nurses. Nurses generally operate from a mindset that views all health-care providers as doing their utmost to provide high-quality care. To increase recognition as well as consumer or enrollee support, APNs must be willing to call attention to the positive aspects of the safe, effective, patient-centered, timely, efficient, equitable care they provide. Finally, APNs must make an informed decision as to the last “P,” place; that is, whether to en- gage in providing care as an employee, as an independent practitioner, or as a contractual partner in an HP.

SUMMARY


Today’s health-care delivery system, with increased merger activity between insurance companies and health-care systems and the biased policies of providers and HPs, has created an environment in which APNs experience sig- nificant barriers to their ability to practice. Strategies are needed to unite the efforts of the ANA, its constituent member associations, other national APN organizations, individual APNs, and consumers. ftere is an ongoing



need to identify trends related to exclusionary behavior and to develop an effective multipronged approach to address anticompetitive policies and practices.
   Nurses have looked to antitrust protections for relief from practices that block their full participation in the health-care market. CNMs and CRNAs used federal an- titrust laws to limit boycotts and expand their market share. fte Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has ren- dered opinions that provide the foundation for anticom- petitive action by RNs. fte Department of Justice and the FTC have issued joint guidelines for antitrust en- forcement in the health-care industry that offer general direction about those practices that are (and that are not) likely to trigger action by these enforcement agencies.
   Restrictive policies at the state level must be ad- dressed by a comprehensive state-based strategy to better define and combat state-based anticompetitive behavior. Such strategies should include the state insurance com- missions, state boards of nursing, and consumer and regulatory entities to enforce the law and to challenge anticompetitive activities.
   It is crucial that nurses in general, and APNs in par- ticular, work to gain recognition for the high-quality, cost-effective care they provide. fte ANA and other nursing groups remain committed to monitoring state and federal activities of organized medicine to coun- teract their effectiveness. To the extent that organized medical societies focus their efforts on opposing or sup- porting legislation, even through the use of exaggerated arguments and legislative strategies, the major option available to nursing is to oppose those efforts and to re- spond to them by ensuring that legislators and the public hear the facts about APN practice.
APNs continue to be notably absent from HP pro-
vider panels and from the national quality enterprise. ftis is likely due, in part, to APNs being predominantly employees. In moving to contracting independently with HPs, APNs can take on full responsibility as managed

care providers. In addition, APNs can engage in the col- lection and reporting of data, using measures related to the quality of care they provide. ftose data, in addition to informing nursing practice, can help purchasers and con- sumers decide where to look for high-quality, effective, efficient care. Using data, APNs can mobilize consumer support for their services, thereby increasing respect for themselves and on behalf of nursing overall. It is up to in- dividual APNs, to professional nursing, to the NQF, and to all who have interest in the provision (or receipt) of high-quality health care to advance quality in a collabora- tive, coordinated way. After all, health-care quality really is an art “more like ballet, than hockey” (Crosby, 1979).
















Public Policy and the Advanced Practice Nurse
Marie-Eileen Onieal



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Understand agenda setting and policy design.
• Explain the interdependence of policy and practice.
• Describe the importance of the political process in shaping health-care policy.
• Integrate sociological, economic, and political perspectives into an understanding of health policy issues.
• Describe and discuss the impact of politics and economics on the health-care de-
livery system.
• Analyze the current health-care policy environment and its effect on advanced practice nursing (APN) practice.
• Participate in influencing political decisions that affect APN practice.
• Advocate for APNs within the policy and health-care communities.










172



INTRODUCTION

To begin a chapter on policy, one must first understand the ambiguity regarding the definition of the term. Policy is derived from the Greek word polis, meaning city-state. To the ancient Greeks, a society was charac- terized by a sense of community and obligation to par- ticipate in its government, religious cults, defense, and economic welfare and to obey its sacred and custom-
ary  laws  (Encyclopædia  Britannica® online;  Merriam- Webster online). Policy can refer to decisions affecting
these large issues of society; however, the term is also defined as principles or actions derived toward specific ends. In simple terms, policy is the rational attempt to achieve common (often complex) objectives. It is important to know that all policies reflect the values of those making them.
   Public policy involves members of the community working together to achieve goals relative to the com- munity, regardless of any individual conflict with said goals. It encompasses the choices that society as a whole, or that a segment of society, makes regarding those goals and priorities, which can be a “public interest.” In that construct, there are often two sides; one of self-interest and one of public spirit. Regardless, the underpinning of the policy is for the good and, in some instances, for the protection of the community.
   Public policy, therefore, is that group of authoritative decisions made in the legislative, executive, or judicial branches of government at either the state or federal level within the jurisdiction of those entities. fte decisions, intended to direct or influence the actions or behav- iors of others, can be laws, rules, or operational criteria. Hence, public policy is the result of the action of the government to solve societal problems. A component of the policy-making process is the formulation of the problem and the identification of possible solutions. fte selection of the solution, based on an analysis of alterna- tives, forms the policy.

THE ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSE

Advanced nursing practice is broadly defined by the Amer- ican Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN, 2004) as “any form of nursing intervention that influences

health care outcomes for individuals or populations, including the direct care of individual patients, man- agement of care for individuals and populations, admin- istration of nursing and health care organizations, and the development and implementation of health policy” (p. 2). fte advanced practice nurse (APN) title consists of four roles: certified nurse practitioner (CNP), certified nurse-midwife (CNM), certified registered nurse anes- thetist (CRNA), and clinical nurse specialist (CNS).
  fte history of the APN can be traced back to the mid-20th century, a time when barriers to health care were increasing. fte combination of the large number of nurses and physicians being deployed to Vietnam and the growth in the U.S. population stressed the health-care provider community. At the same time, Americans were demanding that health care be a fundamental right rather than a privilege. fte need for primary care provid- ers (PCPs) was increasing. APNs quickly began to fill the need for PCPs, especially in rural areas, where poor and low-income families lacked access to health-care services and were woefully underserved.
APNs are a testament to the nursing leaders who pre-
ceded them. Trailblazers such as Florence Nightingale, Lillian Wald, and Margaret Sanger led the way to im- proving health care, especially for the disenfranchised. Following in the footsteps of those pioneers, Loretta Ford blazed the trail for the nurse practitioner (NP) role to meet the health-care needs of society. In 1965, Loretta Ford, EdD, RN, PNP, and Henry Silver, MD, identified the need for better access to care for children and launched the first program to educate nurses in the advanced practice role. From that seed, the profession grew and revealed a new paradigm for health care. fte birth of the advanced nursing practice role was instru- mental in solving the health-care access crises faced in the mid-1960s.
ftroughout nursing history, people considered
nurses a “group set apart to serve society” (Sellew & Neusse, 1951, p. 391). fte public also counted on nurses to provide community service and leadership, thus instilling nurses with a moral obligation to society. ftat obligation constituted a type of social contract for nurses to participate in formulating public policy that affects not only the scope of practice for APNs but also access to APNs as PCPs and integral members of the health-care team.



Policy and the APRN
Still a predominantly female profession, nursing has long faced the formidable task to promote its patient-oriented perspective on health care and health-care reform. ftat being said, the responsibility for working toward meet- ing the health-care needs of society lies with every APN. Every member of the profession has an ethical and moral obligation (the social contract) to influence both public policy and health policy so that the health of the public is both protected and promoted.
   Pioneers also blazed the trail of improving the pub- lic’s access to health care. Mary Wakefield, Richard Car- mona, and Kristine Gebbie, to name a few, are pioneers whose political leadership has influenced changes in the health-care system and in society as well and who stand as contemporary examples of the strength and knowl- edge that nurses bring to the policy table. Sadly, and far too often in the past, the idea of becoming “politically active” has frightened many APNs. Perhaps they lacked the confidence to get involved or the knowledge of how to advocate at the policy level, or perhaps they preferred to stay on the sidelines.
Today, with health policy and leadership as essen-
tial components in all levels of nursing education, the barriers to becoming an active participant in policy de- velopment are decreasing. More than ever before, it is imperative for APNs to recognize and undertake the responsibility of contributing to the development of health policy through political action, thus meeting the obligations of the social contract.
   APNs have long used the policy-making process when reaching decisions—perhaps not as a formal method, but surely informally as the process of gather- ing alternative options for solving the problems at hand. Strategies such as going through a sequence of mental operations to achieve a desired outcome, weighing one option against another, and choosing the one that most likely will achieve the goal are used in practice every day. In the policy-making process APNs apply these strategies in the public arena to issues that impact the practice of APNs. It is imperative that the APN role is represented at the policy table—as is often said, “If you are not at the table, you are on the menu.” Being involved in the discussion of alternatives gives the APN a voice and en- sures that voice is heard on issues in state and national

legislation that potentially affect APNs, their patients, or access to health-care services. Issues that affect the future of the profession are of specific concern, specifically the requirement in some states that APNs practice in collab- oration with a licensed physician.
   Professional nursing organizations worldwide have mandates and processes for nurses to engage at some level in policy development. Provision 7 of the 2015 Code of Ethics for Nurses with Interpretive Statements (Ameri- can Nurses Association [ANA], 2015) requires nurses in all roles and settings to advance the profession through research and scholarly inquiry, professional standards development, and the generation of both nursing and health policy. fte latter emphasizes the nurse’s respon- sibility to participate in policy-making committees at the institutional, local, state, regional, or organizational level. As a component of that, APNs must act on their responsibility to lead, serving on policy committees in their practice settings; mentoring others on such com- mittees; and serving as health-care consultants to local, regional, and state representatives.
Entities that credential nursing programs or pro-
vide guidelines for those programs also have mandates that the curricula include content that provides for the APN to become competent in the policy arena. ftose bodies (National Organization of Nurse Practitioner Faculties [NONPF], AACN, and Commission on Col- legiate Nursing Education [CCNE]) delineate political activism and a commitment to policy development as essential components of professional nursing practice. Engagement in the process of policy development in- cludes the ability to influence policymakers to improve health-care delivery and outcomes. A crucial component of that engagement is understanding the relevant state legislative agenda and how it affects the APN scope of practice.
Political competence is requisite within nursing to
ensure that health policies are effective and meet the real needs of patients, families, and communities. One rea- son it is essential for APNs to assume a political role is the current policy shift in focus away from the individ- ual as patient and toward entire communities and pop- ulations experiencing health inequalities. APNs must get involved at the political level where advocacy and citizenship are located within community/population health.



   Repeated surveys have demonstrated that nurses are trusted sources of information about health care to pa- tients and the public. APNs must advocate for their auton- omy, educate legislators on both the economic and societal value of the care they provide, and strive to convince legis- lators to remove barriers to advanced practice. It is imper- ative that APNs be more involved in policy making that influences the delivery of care. Although professional as- sociations have historically acted on behalf of members to influence health-care policy, it is incumbent upon individ- uals to take active roles in advocating for policies that pro- mote access, equity, quality, and cost containment, all of which are predicated on the removal of barriers to practice.

APN Regulation: The Consensus Model
In July 2008, the Consensus Model for APRN Regulation was published. fte rationale for the APRN Consensus Model was to align the processes of license, accreditation, certification, and education to alleviate concerns about patient safety in light of the increasing numbers of APNs performing in roles with constantly changing expectations. fte model is the product of many years of substantial work conducted by the Advanced Practice Nursing Consen- sus Work Group and the National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) APRN Committee. fte task of the committee was to develop and validate educational stan- dards, role competencies, and specialty competencies that were nationally recognized. fte members of the consensus group represented 41 nursing organizations. fte document they created defines APN practice, describes its regulatory model, identifies the titles to be used for practitioners, de- fines specialties, describes the emergence of new roles and population foci, and presents strategies for implementation. fte Consensus Model for APRN Regulation was en- dorsed by those nursing organizations that participated in the APRN Consensus Work Group and the APRN Joint Dialogue Group with unanimous agreement on most of the recommendations (2008). Essential elements of the Consensus Model include licensure, accreditation,
certification, and education (LACE).
• Licensure is the granting of legal authority to practice.
• Accreditation is the formal review and approval by a recognized agency of educational degree or certifica- tion programs in nursing or nursing-related programs.
• 
Certification is the formal recognition of an individ- ual’s knowledge, skills, and experience demonstrated by the achievement of standards identified by the profession.
• Education is the formal preparation of APNs in
graduate degree granting or postgraduate certificate programs.
Recommendations within the Consensus Model reflect the necessity of both collaboration among regulatory bodies to achieve a sound model as well as continued communication with the goal of increasing the clarity and standardization of APN regulation. In addition, the group recognized the need to continuously and regularly discuss issues related to nursing education, practice, and credentialing. fte model must remain a living docu- ment that can be easily updated to respond to changing societal needs. ftis model provides a formal, ongoing communication mechanism that allows transparent and aligned communication among the key stakeholders having an interest in advanced practice nursing.
Implementation of the recommendations for an
APRN Regulatory Model was intended to occur incre- mentally (NCSBN, 2008) and be fully implemented by 2015. In fact, the model, now 12 years postendorse- ment, has been enacted in more than 40% of states. Twenty-one states have adopted full practice authority licensure and practice laws for APNs. Under these laws, APNs practice independently and are accountable “for recognizing limits of knowledge and experience, plan- ning for the management of situations beyond [their] expertise; and for consulting with or referring patients to other health care providers as appropriate” (Fairman et al., 2011). fte enactment of major Consensus Model elements by a sufficient number of states should create the momentum to encourage the remaining states to align.
fte societal benefit of implementing full practice au-
thority for APNs is that it would allow patients full and direct access to all the services that APNs are prepared to provide. Full practice authority for APNs is supported in reports from several entities. Along with the Institute of Medicine (IOM), which specifically targets regula- tory barriers, organizations such as the Macy Founda- tion support broader scope of practice boundaries. One of the largest consumer groups, the AARP (formerly the American Association of Retired Persons), also supports



an expanded role for APNs in primary care as well as care provided in secondary and tertiary settings. From an economic benefit standpoint, strengthening access to primary care by increasing use of APNs expands the availability of primary care at a lower price. In addi- tion, it has the potential to decrease the incidence of sequelae related to illness and disease that has gone untreated because of access barriers. In Massachusetts alone, research shows that allowing APNs to practice at their full capacity demonstrated a savings of $4.2 bil- lion to $8.4 billion over 10 years and that greater use of retail clinics staffed primarily by APNs could save an additional $6 billion (Eibner et al., 2009). A 2015 study by Perloff and associates documented a decrease of 11% to 29% in the cost of care for those patients whose primary care provider was an APN. Further, in studies evaluating physician-versus-APN cost of care, repeated evidence shows that costs are decreased when APNs provide the care.
Since the 1960s, APNs have enabled the expansion
of community health centers (CHC) across the nation. fte National Association of Community Health Cen- ters (NAHC) documents the existence of a CHC in over 11,000 communities, providing care to more the 29 million people (NAHC, 2019). In addition, mil- lions of American families received care at more than 1,100 retail clinics staffed primarily by APNs, easing the burden on emergency departments (EDs). Several health-care reform initiatives are contingent on APNs providing primary care, disease prevention, and care coordination for newly insured persons who now have access to services at a primary care setting. ftus, legis- lators and health-care administrators must support and implement policies that allow APNs to practice to the fullest extent of their educational preparation, which in turn enhances delivery.

The Affordable Care Act and the APRN
fte ability to access health-care services, regardless of setting, is a long-standing concern for both consum- ers and government. fte IOM Primary Care Reports consistently define accessibility as a cornerstone of care (IOM, 1978, 1993, 1996). fte 2000 IOM seminal re-
port, America’s Health Care Safety Net: Intact But Endan- gered, recognized that the United States fails to provide

timely and adequate access to health-care services for vulnerable populations.
   In March 2010, President Barack Obama signed a comprehensive health reform, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), into law. fte law was designed to increase the number of Americans covered by health insurance and to decrease the cost of health care. Its enactment was the end of decades of attempts to enact comprehensive health insurance. Many arguments have been made both before and since criticizing the passage of this law, calling it too costly and too quickly implemented without sufficient planning or thought. Many have also denigrated the law as being a step toward “socialized medicine,” whereas others warn it encourages “big government,” a historically distrusted approach to solving problems. Improving access to affordable health insurance, and by extension to care, is one of the main goals of the ACA. With its enactment came wide-ranging changes to the U.S. health-care system not seen since the 1965 development of the Medicare and Medicaid programs. Because of these laws, the United States has the opportunity to transform its health-care system and provide higher quality, safer, more affordable, and more accessible care than ever before. ftat said, fulfilling the vision of the ACA requires a transformation of many as- pects of our health-care system, particularly those per- taining to APNs. Hope that the necessary health-system transformation had begun was expressed during the COVID-19 pandemic. During that period, because the need for more access to health care was imperative, gov- ernors waived or suspended collaboration or supervisory requirements for APNs in states that had previously re- quired them.
Despite attempts in 2017 by the Trump administra-
tion and Congress to “repeal and replace” it, the ACA remains in place, resulting in an overall decrease in the numbers of uninsured Americans. Although the enact- ment of the ACA and the recognition of APNs as valu- able members of the health-care team have improved access to services, barriers to full implementation still exist. Case in point: whereas APNs have been autho- rized as Part B Medicare providers since 1998, until 2020, patients who required home health-care services had to locate a physician to certify that the APN con- ducted the required face-to-face certification examina- tion to document eligibility for care. Such requirements



increased costs and often delayed necessary care, which was contrary to the intent of these authorizations. fte COVID-19 pandemic prompted the authorization of APNs to certify and recertify home health-care services for Medicare patients.
   Fully implemented in 2018, the ACA did not ensure universal health care for all Americans. Roughly 45% of
U.S. adults aged 19 to 64 were still inadequately insured, and many adults remained uninsured (Collins et al., 2019). ftere is improved access to health-care services provided by APNs, as evidenced by the nondiscrimina- tion provision acknowledging APNs as PCPs. Having access to a regular source of primary care is associated with more effective provision of preventive services and better management of chronic disease. ftese factors and an aging and growing population contribute to the demand for primary care. A shortage of PCPs, acute in some areas of the country, is expected to significantly grow in the years ahead. ftese are solid reasons to sup- port full practice authority for APNs with favorable and fair reimbursement policies.
According to the IOM’s landmark 2011 report, The
Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health, the ability of APNs to meet the nation’s health-care needs and practice to the full extent of their education and clinical preparation continues to be limited by sig- nificant barriers in federal law and regulation. Further, the report recognizes unique attributes of the nursing profession, including our adaptability, close proximity to patients, and scientific understanding of care processes.
   Healthy People 2020 outlines multiple determinants of health: they include “policymaking, social factors, health services, individual behaviors, and biology and ge- netics” (HHS, 2011). APN education includes learning to assess each person and the social, economic, and en- vironmental factors that influence their health—closely following the recommendations of Healthy People 2020. Moreover, the evidence is compelling that APNs already have a significantly growing role in U.S. primary care delivery (Pohl et al., 2015).

State-to-State Comparisons
Different states have adopted different titles for the APN, including NP, advanced nurse practitioner (ANP), advanced registered nurse practitioner (ARNP), clinical

nurse practitioner (CNP), and registered nurse prac- titioner (RNP). Title variation by state increases the confusion about the APN role. ftis inconsistency in titling has also proven to be very confusing to the public (Fotsch, 2016). Further, the differences in how certifica- tion bodies direct APNs to specify their credential (e.g., FNP-C, CPNP) contributes to the confusion. ftere is no uniform model of regulation of APNs across states. Although the Consensus Model is a step toward elimi- nating that lack of uniformity, each state independently determines the APN legal scope of practice, the roles that are recognized, the criteria for entry into advanced practice, and the certification examinations accepted for entry-level competence assessment. ftese have all cre- ated a significant barrier for APNs to easily move from state to state and have, as a result, decreased access to care for patients.
fte ACA recognizes APNs as PCPs eligible to receive
grants and primary care bonus payments with no men- tion of collaboration or supervision requirements. In fact, acknowledging APNs as PCPs is paramount to the success of the ACA. Yet the barriers for APNs to practice autonomously continue. Restrictions on scope of prac- tice limit the supply of labor, restrict competition, and increase the cost of services. Utilizing APNs to the full extent of their knowledge and competence extends the paradigm of health care. APNs must be acknowledged as full partners with physicians and other health-care pro- fessionals in redesigning health care in the United States to achieve better health outcomes.
Practice authority typically falls into one of three cat-
egories: full, reduced, or restricted (Fig. 10.1). When the APN role was in its infancy, states with the most need for PCPs, particularly those with large rural areas, were more apt to mitigate statutory and regulatory barri- ers. A full practice license allows the APN to evaluate pa- tients, diagnose, order and interpret diagnostic tests, and initiate and manage treatments—including prescrib- ing medications. ftis is significant. In those states, the right to full practice falls under the exclusive licensure authority of the state board of nursing, not a regulated collaborative agreement with another health discipline. ftis is the model recommended by the IOM and the NCSBN. Today, across the 50 U.S. states and territories, only 24 states and Washington, DC, grant APNs the au- thority to practice the full extent of their preparation.








NHMACTRIMD





Figure 10.1 U.S. State and Territory Practice Environments for APNs



Reimbursement
fte Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) regulate federally supported insurance programs. Medi- care provides insurance for people age 65 or older, peo- ple under age 65 with certain disabilities, and people of all ages with end-stage renal disease (permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or a kidney transplant).
   Medicaid provides health insurance coverage for our nation’s most vulnerable individuals and families. Med- icaid, a shared state and federal program, is regulated dif- ferently than other insurance providers. Each state sets its own guidelines for eligibility, services, and reimburse- ment (CMS, 2016).
   Effective January 1998, services provided by primary care APNs became reimbursable by Medicare. Although the reimbursement rate was lower than that for physi- cians (85%), this was a breakthrough in mitigating bar- riers of access to care based on payment. Despite this achievement, challenges to reimbursement for APNs continue to exist. In addition to Medicare and Medic- aid, many third-party payers, whether a managed care organization or other commercial insurer, recognize


APNs as qualified health-care providers. However, dif- ferences in the reimbursement and coverage policies can be extensive. ftis conundrum is compounded by the restrictions of Medicaid and other private insurers as well as restrictions within states and policies related to direct reimbursement and supervisory requirements by another health-care provider. Each entity has its own set of billing criteria and within them exist challenges for the APN.
   It is imperative that reimbursement policies for all payers be updated to guarantee that APNs are eligible to participate and are directly accessible to patients. Moreover, reimbursement should reflect true costs asso- ciated with providing quality care and promote the ef- fective and efficient utilization of every member of the health-care provider workforce. fte IOM (2011) echoes the sentiment of the APN community in its recommen- dations that all third-party payers participate in direct reimbursement for APNs who provide services within their scope of practice.
   fte requirement for collaborative agreements in many states limits the ability of APNs to have a self-governing



license. Lack of consistent reimbursement across states has kept APNs largely invisible and minimizes the quan- tity and quality of care they currently provide. Moreover, reduced Medicare reimbursement for APN services, which is already less than the physician reimbursement, makes financial solvency difficult.
   Despite years of APN-related legislation in the 50 states and other U.S. territories, barriers to full practice authority remain. Within these bills were recommenda- tions to remove those barriers that make it difficult for APNs to serve as PCPs and leaders of patient-centered medical homes or other models of primary care deliv- ery. ftose barriers include inequitable reimbursement policies, scope of practice, and controlled substance prescriptive authority, required supervision by another health-care provider, and discrimination by individual health plans. State and national regulatory and reim- bursement policies must be amended to remove barri- ers that make it difficult for APNs to serve as PCPs in all models of care delivery. Moreover, state and national policies that regulate APN practice must be consis- tent throughout the country. Until that occurs, delays in access to health care, underserved areas, and rising health-care expenditures will continue.

SUMMARY


Over the years, studies have consistently demonstrated that APNs provide high-quality, cost-effective health care to patients of all ages in all walks of life in all set- tings. It is crucial that reimbursement policies and sys- tems be reengineered to reflect the true costs of care and promote sustainable practice.
   APNs must be prepared to participate in the polit- ical arena. ftey must focus on both national and state contexts in order to encourage policy development that includes APNs as key players in the delivery of quality care to the American public. It is a component of their social contract to maintain accountability to their com- munities to provide high-quality and affordable care.
   It is easy to forget that the APN role, established in 1965, is a relatively young one when compared with the nursing profession as a whole. Despite its relative youth, it has grown to become one of the most important roles in the health- care community. APNs already have a rich history of pro- viding effective and essential care to patients and the public. As we look to the future, we must celebrate and draw upon our rich, if comparatively brief, history. And all APNs must continue to be active participants in the political process.















Resource Management
Cindy Aiena, Eileen Flaherty, and Antigone Grasso*



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Interpret profit and loss (P&L) statements.
• Explain the drivers of operating revenue.
• Distinguish relationships between reimbursement and payer mix.
• Describe types of expenses: salary, nonsalary, and depreciation.
• Understand fundamental considerations in creating a budget.
• Recommend strategies to maximize revenue.
• Illustrate cost-containment strategies.
• Demonstrate the impact that advanced practice nurses (APNs) can have on revenue generation and expenditure of resources.




INTRODUCTION

In any setting, the APN influences and is influenced by the environment of an organization. fte organization provides the structure in which the APN’s clinical prac- tice goals will be pursued.
   fte underlying assumption for any organization is that it exists to produce some product or service (out- put) that is of value. fte corollary assumptions are that,

because the output is of value, it will generate revenue and that the revenue generated will both cover the costs of the resources expended (input) and provide some level of profit (even for a “nonprofit” organization). Profit is necessary to ensure the continued viability of the orga- nization, for example, to upgrade existing facilities, to replace outdated equipment, to expand services, or to add new programs. In for-profit organizations, profit is also needed to provide a return for investors or owners



* Earlier versions of this chapter were authored with Christina Graf.
180



and encourage continued investment. If this does not occur, the organization will not survive. To succeed in its mission, the organization must secure its financial viabil- ity through appropriate prioritization of outcomes and effective utilization of resources.
   Organizational decisions can affect both the content and direction of the APN’s practice or in fact determine to what extent APNs are able to practice within the organization. fte absence of effective input from cli- nicians can result in inappropriate or ineffective expec- tations of the clinician. Similarly, clinicians’ decisions can generate unintended consequences that undermine the health and strength of the organization. fterefore, the APN needs to understand the business and financial structure and systems of the organization. For example, how does one’s practice affect revenue generation and expenditure of resources? To what extent do business and fiscal policies enhance or constrain clinical practice?

STRUCTURE

In accomplishing its mission, an organization engages in a series of transactions that it tracks and manages through its financial system(s). ftese transactions are categorized according to the chart of accounts, a matrix structure that organizes the transactions. One axis of the matrix, the account codes, aggregates transactions according to type (e.g., patient care revenue, salaries, office supplies, maintenance contracts). fte other axis—the cost cen- ter, revenue center, or responsibility center—aggregates transactions according to function and may be identi- fied by service line (cardiac center, cancer-care center), physical location (patient care unit, outpatient clinic), or activity (blood bank, hemodialysis). fte detailed desig- nations in the chart of accounts are specific to each or- ganization and, as such, not only aggregate transactions for better information and management but also provide a picture of the organization and its internal structure. fte aggregated transactions are summarized in a state- ment of operations called the profit and loss (P&L) or income and expense (I&E) statement that also quantifies the operating margin or the gain or loss (income minus expense) from operations. See Figure 11.1.
Most health-care organizations use accrual account-
ing in preparing financial statements. Accrual accounting

specifies that revenues are recognized when services are provided (versus when cash is received) and expenses are reported as resources are used (versus when bills are paid). fte matching principle requires that, when revenues are reported, the associated or matching expenses are re- ported. ftus, revenues reported for activities within a particular cost center are matched to the expenses gener- ated in producing those revenues and reflect the activity and resource utilization that occurred in that reporting period regardless of when actual monies for services are received or bills for resources are paid. External regu- lations provide strict guardrails around how and when revenues/expenses are recorded, and these regulations must be adhered to or institutions can face both financial and reputational penalties.
Example: A patient is discharged on March 30. fte
March financial statement will reflect the expected reim- bursement as well as the cost of the salaries for the staff who cared for that patient and cost of supplies utilized during the care of the patient. Although the cash has not been received nor the bills paid, the P&L will reflect the estimates for both of these so that the P&L represents a balanced picture of the activity that occurred in March.

REVENUE


Revenue refers to the income that an organization re- ceives and can be broken into two main categories: operating and nonoperating. Operating revenue in- cludes the income from the primary activities of the organization. For a hospital, this might include patient revenue, retail activities (retail pharmacies, parking, and cafeteria), and research-related income. Nonop- erating revenue is from other sources that benefit the organization through activities such as investments and philanthropy that are not used to support routine business activity.

Operating Revenue
Revenue that is generated primarily from the day-to-day activities of the organization is termed operating rev- enue. In health-care organizations, the majority of the operating revenue is related to patient or client services rendered and may come from a variety of payers: the




PROFIT AND LOSS STATEMENT FISCAL YEAR 2017
(In Thousands of Dollars)
Actual
Budget
VarianceVariance PercentGross Patient Services RevenueInpatient$515,994$496,843$19,1513.9%Outpatient$341,769$332,764$9,0052.7%Total Gross Patient Services Revenue$857,763$829,607$28,1563.4%(GPSR)Deductions From RevenueContractual Allowances$498,732$479,560–$19,172–4.0%Charity Care$23,760$22,230–$1,531–6.9%Net Patient Services Revenue$335,272$327,818$7,4542.3%Indirect Research Revenue$31,555$30,951$6052.0%Other Operating Revenue$16,089$15,126$9646.4%Total Operating Revenue$382,916$373,894$9,0222.4%
ExpensesSalaries & Wages$152,628$151,908–$720–0.5%Employee Benefits$26,517$26,726$2090.8%Supplies$58,682$56,421–$2,261–4.0%Utilities$9,503$10,187$6856.7%Other$81,249$77,487–$3,762–4.9%Depreciation$27,300$27,468$1680.6%Provision for Bad Debt$8,758$10,126$1,36813.5%Interest$4,956$5,485$5299.6%Total Operating Expense$369,592$365,806–$3,786–1.0%Income (Loss) from Operations$13,324$8,088$5,237n/aPercentage of Total Revenue3.5%2.2%Note: Positive variances are favorable to budget; negative variances are unfavorable to budget.
Figure 11.1 Sample Profit and Loss (P&L) Statement



federal government (Medicare, military, and veterans benefit programs), state governments (Medicaid, health insurance exchanges, and other state programs), other third-party payers (Blue Cross/Blue Shield, health main- tenance organizations, fee-for-service insurance plans), or the recipient of the service (self-pay).
   Revenue or income refers to the monies received for services provided and reflects the activity of the

organization. ftere are two categories of revenue: Gross Patient Service Revenue and Net Patient Service Reve- nue. Gross Revenue is the unit price or charge allocated to each specific service, activity, or item multiplied by the activity of each unit. fte organization’s charge mas- ter maintains this list, which is intended to reflect the related costs plus some margin of profit. fte charge is universal and is consistent across all patients, regardless



of their insurance status. Net Patient Service Revenue is the revenue that is actually collected. Depending on the insurance provider, there are a variety of structures and discounts that may lower the amount that is actually paid to an institution. In addition, the institution also has to account for patients who are uninsured and can’t pay for necessary services (charity care) and for charges that are not collected from those who are not expected to pay (bad debt). fterefore, charges are not necessarily an ac- curate reflection of actual income for the service provided (Gapenski, 2016). More detail on this topic is included in the Managing Resources section of this chapter.
Medicare revenues are determined not by charges on
individual services but by a prospective payment system that allocates a fixed payment based on an episode of care (Cleverly et al., 2018). fte payment is determined for inpatient episodes of care by the discharge diagno- sis (diagnosis-related group [DRG]) and is adjusted for variations in regional cost of living, urban versus rural setting, and organizational involvement in medical ed- ucation. Except for some small amount of adjustment for cost or length-of-stay outliers, the payment to an organization for each DRG is constant, regardless of costs incurred. ftis prospective payment system is not applicable to psychiatric and rehabilitation units or hos- pitals, children’s and cancer hospitals, or long-term care facilities; these are reimbursed on a reasonable cost ba- sis, with some limits, for Medicare-eligible patients. For outpatients, Medicare has developed a similar prospec- tive payment system using ambulatory payment classi- fication groups (APCs) that aggregate services that are similar clinically and with respect to resource require- ments. Medicare reimburses providers for services based on prior fixed rates for the APCs (Rimler et al., 2015).
Medicaid and other state-sponsored payment pro-
grams reflect not only the intent of the program but also the economic and political environment of the state and thus vary widely from state to state. fte state determines what will be covered and the level of reimbursement and may limit payments through global or flat-rate fees for episodes of care, exclusion of certain services from cover- age, discounting of specific charges, or targeted spending caps. fte implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) affected Medicaid programs by redefining coverage regulations as well as federal sup- port funding levels.
  
Many nongovernmental third-party payers negotiate contracts directly with health-care organizations. ftese contracts may include DRG-like prospective payment systems, discounted or adjusted rates, risk-sharing agree- ments such as flat-rate payments per member per month for all defined care needs, prior authorization require- ments, or other mechanisms that minimize the cost to the payer and distance the revenue from the charge. ftese payers also include in their reimbursement systems copayments, specified dollar amounts per episode of care, deductibles, and identified annual dollar amounts or deductibles that are paid directly by the consumer. As health-care costs rise, products are being created to drive consumer awareness and engagement in lowering the overall cost. ftese products shift more of the cost to the consumer (e.g., high cost deductible plans) in an effort to change consumer behavior through lower utilization or utilizing lower cost providers. Fee-for-service insur- ance payers typically reimburse based on a negotiated percent of charges, but there also may be copayments or deductibles, payment ceilings, or service exclusions that shift the burden to the insured. In any case, fee- for-service insurance provides only a small percentage of the income of health-care organizations. Even smaller is the proportion of self-pay patients who are able to afford health care or who have chosen not to contract with an insurance carrier. fte number of uninsured, who have no access to federal, state, or private coverage, generates charitable care for many health-care organizations. How- ever, it is important to note that with the implemen- tation of the ACA in 2010, the number of uninsured Americans has gradually decreased. Other reductions to expected revenue come in the form of denials and bad debt, where either the insurer determines that services provided did not meet the eligibility requirements or a patient who was expected to pay, in the form of copay- ments or deductibles, defaults on those payments. As health-care costs increase and all parties become more cost conscious, it becomes important for providers to understand the rules and meet all requirements to ensure that they are getting paid for all services rendered. ftis adds to the cost and complexity because payers all have, for example, different rules on coverage, documentation, and prior authorization, which can lead to significant de- nial rates where the care was provided but the insurer re- fuses to pay for the service. ftese costs cannot be passed



onto the patient because they had a reasonable expecta- tion that the insurer would pay for the cost. ftus, the hospital must bear the lost revenue.
   In addition to the many reimbursement methods that currently exist, new payment mechanisms continue to emerge. For example, many payers link quality measures, outcomes, and utilization measures with reimbursement incentives, also referred to as pay-for-performance and shared savings programs. fte intention of such pro- grams is to encourage cost management while main- taining continuous improvement in the quality of care delivered in all health-care settings. In these arrange- ments, health-care organizations and their providers are held accountable not only for achieving defined quality standards to receive full payment for services but also to decrease unnecessary costs. Efforts around population health management and medical homes are designed to improve performance on these measures.
Another example of linking reimbursement to quality
is the October 2008 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) reimbursement policy that denies Medi- care reimbursement for specific hospital-acquired con- ditions (HAC) that were not present on admission; this list of HACs was further revised in 2013. See Box 11.1. CMS named these medical errors “never events” because they should never occur for any patient. As health-care organizations are required to assume responsibility for the cost consequences of preventable complications, more emphasis is being placed on the leadership role that nurses can play in reducing medical errors. More specifi- cally, many of the “never events” such as pressure injuries and patient falls are nursing sensitive, which further un- derscores the importance of high-quality nursing care in protecting patients and securing revenues. Intended to motivate hospitals to improve patient safety, CMS has encouraged state Medicaid programs to follow Medi- care’s lead. In addition, many commercial health plans are also seeking to implement payment plans that will hold hospitals financially accountable for preventable errors (Austin & Pronovost, 2015).
In addition to revenue from patient services, organiza-
tions may generate operating revenue from other day-to-day activities in areas such as the parking garage or the cafeteria, or indirect research revenue, the overhead received from research sponsors for providing facilities and administrative support for research projects. Total operating revenue is net



     Hospital-Acquired Conditions (HACs) List
• Foreign object retained after  surgery
• Air embolism
• Blood incompatibility
• Stage III and IV pressure ulcers (pressure injuries)
• Falls and trauma
• Manifestations of poor glycemic control
• Catheter-associated urinary tract infection (UTI)
• Vascular catheter-associated infection
• Surgical site infection, mediastinitis, following coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)
• Surgical site infection following bariatric sur-
gery for obesity
• Surgical site infection following certain ortho- pedic procedures
• Surgical site infection following cardiac im-
plantable electronic device (CIED)
• Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)/pulmonary embolism (PE) following certain orthopedic procedures
• Iatrogenic pneumothorax with venous
catheterizationCenters for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2020). Hospital-acquired conditions.


patient services revenue plus other operating and research revenue and reflects the total reimbursement in actual monies that the organization expects to receive from oper- ations. fte greater the ability to diversify revenue sources, the better off an institution is to protect itself from changes that constrain revenue growth (capacity constraints, un- favorable changes in reimbursement) or to provide addi- tional funding to support unreimbursed programs (art and music therapy, volunteer programs, etc.).

Nonoperating Revenue
fte organization may also generate nonoperating revenue that is not tied directly to the services provided. Nonop- erating revenue is managed and reported separately from



operating revenue. ftis revenue is not included when re- viewing the financial implications of day-to-day operations nor included in the operating margin. Interest income may be generated on investments. Gifts or donations may be given to a not-for-profit organization for a specific purpose or for the general purposes of the organization. If the gift is in the form of an endowment, the principal (the original amount of the gift) is invested and only the interest income on the investment may be used. ftese funds can then be used to support activities that are more one time or unique in nature and not part of the day-to-day operations (e.g., start-up of new programs). Although some organizations can include these items in their operating margins, they are more susceptible to and at risk from the fluctuations in the market or philanthropic environment. fterefore, the goal is to develop a financial strategy that does not depend on these unreliable sources of revenue for standard operations.

EXPENSES

Expenses are costs incurred in providing services. On the P&L, these are defined by cost categories that describe the type of activity. Departments may see all or only some of these costs reflected in their departmental ex- pense base, depending on the type of work they do.
   Wage and salary expenses are the costs of personnel, the labor costs required to deliver care and other activi- ties within the organization. Salaries are determined by the organization, subject to regulation regarding mini- mum wage and fair labor practices and, in some organi- zations, union contracts. Salaries include base wages plus any differentials, premiums, bonuses, or other monetary rewards. Fringe benefits fall into two categories: those mandated by law, such as unemployment insurance and workers’ compensation, and those specific to the orga- nization, such as health insurance and pension benefits. Other benefits that incur costs are related to the organi- zation’s personnel policies regarding sick, vacation, holi- day, and other paid time off. In addition to the obvious salary cost for the employee receiving paid time off, there is an additional expense if the work of that employee must be covered by another individual. If the work of the employee is not fully covered, there may be a produc- tivity cost associated with volume or revenue that is not realized. In a practice, if practitioners are functioning

at efficient levels, the absence of one practitioner on a paid leave will result either in loss of revenue for patients not seen or in increased costs for a temporary replace- ment for the practitioner. Note that this relates to paid absence. Unpaid absence leaves unspent wages available to support a temporary replacement or provides a cost offset to unrealized volume and associated revenue.
   Nonsalary expenses are those nonpersonnel costs for consumable supplies, minor equipment, and related ac- tivities used in the delivery of service. Some are directly related to patient care activities, such as medical sup- plies, drugs, and blood products. Others are related to supports for the care process (office supplies, telephone charges), the environment (maintenance contracts, utili- ties), personnel (seminar registration, consultation fees), or interest on loans.
   Depreciation is the recognition of the cost of capital as- sets (Gapenski, 2016). Capital expense refers to major in- vestments in durable assets, such as facilities, equipment, and machinery. Capital assets are expected to have a value and useful life significantly greater than that of minor equipment. fte threshold for determining what is capital- ized is set by the organization and usually describes both a monetary value and an expected life span. For example, the threshold for capital might be equipment that costs more than $5,000 and has a useful life greater than 3 years. Under these guidelines, neither a $100 IV pole (monetary threshold) nor $1,000 worth of instructional videotapes (life span threshold) would be considered capital.
Because capital assets are expected to be used over an
extended period, their full purchase price does not appear as an operational expense at the time of purchase. Rather, in each reporting period for the duration of its useful life, the P&L report reflects the capital depreciation or use of the capital asset during the period. For example, if a cap- ital purchase of $12,000 is expected to have a useful life of 10 years, one-tenth of its value is estimated to be used each year. fterefore, the financial statement would report depreciation of $1,200 per year or $100 per month.

COST CONCEPTS


A variety of cost concepts are relevant in understanding resource management and utilized when making deci- sions about long-term planning (Cleverly et al., 2018).



Variable Versus Fixed Costs
Variable costs are those related to the volume of activity; they fluctuate based on changes in volume. Fixed costs are those that remain constant, regardless of fluctuations in volume. In personnel, staff nurses may be considered variable—more are needed when the unit is at 90% oc- cupancy than when it is at 75% occupancy—whereas the clinical nurse specialist (CNS) and nurse leader are fixed—one allocated to the unit(s), regardless of the number of patients. Similarly, medical supply expense is variable based on patient volume and acuity; whereas maintenance contract expenses may be fixed based on the terms of the contract and not driven by volume. Some expenses may be step-variable, that is, fixed over a short range and variable over a longer range. For example, one secretary may be sufficient for a practice with up to four clinicians, but a second secretary may be required if an additional clinician enters the practice. In that case, the number of secretaries is fixed at two unless the number of clinicians increases beyond eight. In general, all costs that are fixed in the short run are variable in the longer
run. See Figure 11.2.

Direct Versus Indirect Costs
Direct costs are those related to the process of pro- ducing a product or service. Indirect costs are those incurred in supporting that process. In practice, the

identification of expenses as direct or indirect depends on the context. In addressing an individual patient, caregivers—nurses, therapists, practitioners—would be considered direct; whereas the leadership and sup- port staff—secretaries, CNS, or nurse leader—would be considered indirect. In considering patient popula- tions aggregated by clinical care unit or practice, the entire staff of that unit or practice could be consid- ered direct; whereas support departments—human resources, environmental services, finance—are iden- tified as indirect.

Total Versus Unit Costs
Total cost is the aggregate cost incurred within a given time period for all volume of activity in that time period. Unit cost is the cost of one unit of volume, calculated as the total cost divided by the total units of volume. Marginal cost is the additional cost required to produce one more unit of volume. Because the total cost includes both variable and fixed costs, economies of scale can be achieved by increasing volume—and variable costs—on the unchanged fixed cost base. For example, if a clinical care unit can increase its occupancy, it will expend more in variable direct care staff, but the cost per patient day will decrease because the fixed costs are spread over more patient days. Marginal cost for each additional patient day is equal to the cost of the variable staff and supplies for that patient day.





Figure 11.2 Fixed Versus Variable Costs



Incremental Versus Opportunity Costs
Incremental cost is the added cost incurred for an activ- ity that would not be expensed if that activity did not occur. ftese costs may be variable or fixed, but they are essentially new costs and do not include current costs that may be redirected to the new activity. For example, if a CNS proposes to teach a new series of classes on pediatric cardiac life support, incremental costs could include items such as demonstration mannequins, au- diovisual aids, books, or other informational material and supplies for practical application. ftese would all be incremental costs because they would be incurred specifically for the purpose of the program. fte partic- ipants’ salaries are incremental if they are paid beyond their usual or regular hours to attend the program. If the program is to be given within the participants’ reg- ular working hours and it will be necessary to provide additional staff hours to cover those in class, these re- placement costs are also included in the incremental costs. fte CNS’s time in preparation and teaching and the facilities or space in which the classes are taught would not be considered incremental costs because if the classes were not given, the CNS’s salary and the cost of maintaining the facilities would still be incurred. fte incremental costs would be calculated for the number of students and programs presented over a given period. Opportunity cost measures the loss of the effect of the next best alternative use of the resources allocated to a par- ticular use. If the previously described program is approved for implementation, what activity will the CNS forego to implement the program? If the participants are taking the course during their regular working hours and replacement is not required, what will they not be doing that might oth- erwise have been done? If the incremental resources were not allocated to this program, how would they be used in- stead? fte answers to these questions describe the opportu- nity costs. Identification and quantification of opportunity costs can provide important information in setting priori-
ties and analyzing alternatives (Finkler et al., 2019).


BUDGETING

Effective management presumes that an organization, in planning for its continuing existence, is able to describe and project the level of activity or production of services

or products it will experience and to anticipate the re- sources that will be required for that level of activity. fte budget is the translation of that plan into quantities and dollars. fte conceptual plan on which the budget is based may describe the projections for the entire organi- zation or for some particular sector or activity and will determine the scope of the budget including the time frame and the level of detail.

Types of Budgets
Strategic planning is likely to be translated into a long-range budget that addresses the direction of the organization over the next 3 to 5 years or more. For this type of budget, the projections of volume and re- sources will be at a high level with estimations of reve- nue and expense totals but not at an extremely detailed level. fte major drivers of volume and resources will be described and quantified and include items such as anticipated changes in the patient mix, Medicare reim- bursement rates, treatment protocols, and inflationary cost increases as well as incorporating any new major strategies such as new programs and service lines or add- ing capacity. Other factors will be estimated in the ag- gregate based on current experience. fte strategic plan and long-range budget are schematic representations of the direction of the organization rather than detailed blueprints. ftey need to be reviewed and refreshed at regular intervals to ensure that the organization contin- ues to move in its preferred direction and to respond to significant changes in the health-care environment or to its own strategic plans, ensuring that they are afford- able. Often certain metrics will be targeted to achieve in that time frame and putting this plan together identifies the challenges that will need to be addressed in order to meet those targets (margin, cash on hand, cash for capital spending, etc.).
fte operational budget, on the other hand, ad-
dresses the detailed, day-to-day activity of the organi- zation. ftis type of budget looks in extensive detail at the projected volume and resources and the associated revenue and expense over a prescribed time. Usually the operating budget is constructed for the fiscal year, the organization’s 12-month accounting cycle. fte budget describes anticipated activity based on the specific op- erational goals and plans of the organization for that period and incorporates assumptions that will affect



revenue and expense, for example, changes in reim- bursement, inflationary increases in the cost of utilities or supplies, and staffing needs. fte budget is prepared at the detailed level of account within each cost or revenue center. ftroughout the fiscal year, actual performance is reported against the budget for each month and cu- mulatively for the fiscal year to date and is reported for each cost or revenue center and account code. However, each fiscal year’s operating budget is independent of other years; that is, the positive or negative variance and the unspent budgeted monies from one fiscal year are not carried over into the next. fte operating budget as a plan is valuable at the detailed level, the level at which the work occurs and at which the activity and resources must be managed. Aggregation of the budgeted and ac- tual revenue and expense at the organizational level is also useful in providing overall direction and evaluation for the organization as a whole.
fte capital budget reflects the projected expense for
necessary facility improvement or acquisition of ma- jor durable equipment. Funding for the capital bud- get comes from the profit generated from operations, or from loans, which are also dependent on the orga- nization’s ability to generate a profit from operations. Although the capital budget may be prepared in yearly cycles, unlike the operating budget it is contained by the time frame of the project rather than of the budget year. ftus, capital funds may be allocated over several budget years for a particular remodeling project or equipment replacement proposal, and, unlike the operating bud- get, the funds will carry over from year to year until the project is completed. fte capital budget is based on the plans and projections of the organization and will ad- dress the facilities and equipment needed to expand or upgrade services. ftese can include the need for new or added clinical equipment such as cardiac monitors and ultrasound equipment; major software (electronic med- ical record, provider order entry system); and facilities improvement (renovation and remodeling). fte capital budget also needs to address the maintenance needs of the organization and therefore will also include such things as replacing existing equipment (such as venti- lators that have reached the end of their useful life) or facilities maintenance (such as the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning [HVAC] system). Finally, in pre- paring the capital budget, it is important to consider

any additional operating costs that will be incurred be- cause of the use of the capital asset. For example, pur- chase of a monitoring system (clearly a capital expense) can also generate operating costs in the form of replace- ment leads or probes, batteries, or electrocardiogram (ECG) tracing paper as well as potential salary costs if additional personnel hours are required to review the monitors or file the tracings. ftese expenses must be identified and incorporated in the appropriate operat- ing budget.
   Frequently, organizations will consider initiating new activities or expanding or changing existing ones. fte program budget is useful for this purpose. ftis type of budget isolates one activity or program from all other organizational activities to evaluate its effectiveness. fte basis for the program budget is the conceptual plan of the program, or the program proposal, which also de- termines the time frame for the budget as well as the types of expenses to be included (e.g., total costs, incre- mental costs, opportunity costs). For example, a plan to expand the hours of service for a medical urgent care clinic, using existing facilities and equipment, may be adequately described in a program budget that looks only at incremental volume, resources, revenue, and ex- pense for the current fiscal year. Evaluation of the fiscal viability of the plan would consider the extent to which incremental revenue exceeds incremental expense. A plan to add a neonatal intensive care unit in a service that previously provided only routine and intermediate care would require a more extensive program budget. fte quantification of activity would need to address po- tential volume—both numbers of neonates and clinical conditions—and probable income based on payer mix and reimbursement rates. Resource requirements would include both capital expenditures for facilities and major equipment and operational expenses for personnel, sup- plies, minor equipment, utilities, and overhead. Because of the time required to set up the program and the an- ticipated ramp-up from opening to full occupancy and utilization, the program plan would cover an extended period. Fiscal estimates would then need to be adjusted for the effect of inflation and reimbursement changes. Evaluation of the program would include a calculation of breakeven, that is, the point at which the average total revenue for an admission is equal to the average total cost. Before breakeven, the program generates a loss for



each admission. After breakeven, the program generates net revenue for each admission. See Figure 11.3.
   Determining the value of a program considers more than the fiscal benefit, for example, opportunity costs, social benefits and costs, or public relations value. ftese factors are difficult to quantify and are therefore not part of the program budget, although they would be con- tained in the program proposal. When a program bud- get is approved and implemented, it becomes part of the operating budget for the implementation period and for all subsequent years. However, it is also useful to evaluate actual performance against the original program budget. fte projection of the cash budget is critical in the life of the organization. In the other types of budget, one of the guiding principles is matching revenue to ex- penses, that is, identifying the income for the activity that occurred in a particular time period and the ex- penses related to that activity that were incurred in that time period. Typically, however, the actual receipt of the revenue and the payment of the expenses do not occur in the same time period. Services are billed to third-party payers, but the actual revenue is received weeks or even

months later. Supplies are ordered, delivered, and used; but the organization may be billed days or weeks later, and the bills may be paid on a 30-, 60-, or 90-day pay- ment cycle. ftus, the revenue and expense projections for a particular accounting cycle in the operational bud- get may not reflect that cycle’s cash flow, the actual cash coming into and going out of the organization. fte cash budget projects this flow over the course of the fiscal year to ensure that there will be sufficient money in the or- ganization to meet its obligations to its employees for payment of salaries, to its suppliers for payment of bills, and to its lenders for repayment of loans.

The Operating Budgeting Process
fte budget process is based on the conceptual plan, goals, and objectives of the organization. fte first step in this process is to identify the activity that generates revenue and drives resource utilization. Within the health-care system, there are typical volume statistics that are used to quantify activity: admissions, discharges, patient days, patient visits, procedures, and tests. In the























Figure 11.3 Breakeven



aggregate, however, these measures do not have the level of precision needed for accurate prediction of revenue and expenses. For purposes of predicting revenue, the volume needs to be further defined to reflect the basis of payment—by payer, by service, by product line, by DRG, or by test or procedure code.
   In contrast to revenue, different categories may be needed for the purposes of predicting resource utiliza- tion. DRG payments, for example, reflect medical con- dition and interventions but do not as clearly reflect nursing care needs of patients. fterefore, patients in the same DRG—and generating the same revenue—may have different nursing care needs based on age, func- tional capabilities, communication issues, or learning needs and thus generate different levels of resource uti- lization. Payment systems may be based on global fees (e.g., for vaginal pregnancy and delivery) or on panels of patients (with the practice or organization receiving a per patient per month payment regardless of utiliza- tion of services) that are not reflective of the individual variability in care needs and resource requirements. It is necessary, therefore, to develop workload measures that identify both the resource drivers, that is, the significant activities that generate resource utilization, and the ele- ments that account for individual variation within those drivers. For example, in the cancer infusion unit, the pri- mary measure may be the patient visit or the therapeutic protocol. However, resource utilization may vary based on whether this is a new or returning patient, the length of the treatment, the patient’s response to the therapy, or other issues or concerns that the patient raises in the course of the visit. Although it may not be possible to implement a workload measure that addresses this vari- ability in minute detail, it is possible to develop measures that differentiate among patients and aggregate those with similar resource requirements. For patients with the same medical condition or undergoing the same thera- peutic protocol, it may be possible to identify variations in resource utilization based on age, stage of treatment, functional level of activity, or other indicators. Using these indicators as well as the primary volume indicator of the visit or protocol to describe patient populations, one can then generate a more accurate projection of re- quired personnel and resources. fte patients can be ag- gregated into groups with similar resource requirements, and the groups can be weighted based on their average

utilization relative to one another. For example, in a par- ticular practice, patients receiving a specific intervention may require 15 minutes of the clinician’s time. However, a follow-up patient may require only 10 minutes, and a new patient may require 40 minutes. All patients may require 5 minutes for documentation and 5 minutes for follow-up. fte intervention patient, therefore, will con- sume 25 minutes of time, and the others 20 minutes and 50 minutes, respectively. If the intervention patient is the benchmark and weighted at 1.0, the follow-up patient is weighted at 0.8 (20/25 [1.0]), and the new patient at 2.0 (50/25 [1.0]). Projecting visits by patient type and ap- plying the appropriate weights will give a more accurate representation of the anticipated workload than project- ing the visits alone.
Similarly, although there has been a current focus on
considering mandated nurse–patient ratios as a way of ensuring adequate levels of care for patients, the ratios ignore the differences among patients in their need for nursing care. Identifying and measuring these nursing care requirements, often referred to as patient acuity, can be valuable information in managing and allocat- ing nursing resources. To do so, many acute care set- tings have implemented patient classification systems as a methodology for quantifying nursing workload. Such systems, which classify patients according to their needs for nursing care (examples may include activities of daily living, medication administration, physiological assess- ment or intervention, communication support, med- ication preparation), enable organizations to capture actual nursing workload and to measure productivity by looking at the relationship between nursing hours and workload over time. ftis approach can provide a new dimension for managing resources beyond the more sim- plistic but common measure of workload as patient days and nursing hours per patient day (Finkler et al., 2019). Variable personnel and material resource require- ments are based on the projected workload volume. Us- ing historical and current data, it is possible to construct a ratio of resources to volume—personnel hours per unit of work or supplies per unit of work. fte personnel hours will include more than the direct care hours because there is indirect time in the form of orientation for new staff, continuing education for current staff, practice or departmental meetings, teaching or precepting, or other organizational activities that are a necessary part of the



working year. In addition, the personnel hours must re- flect the impact of benefit time because the individual on sick, holiday, or vacation time is not available to attend to the workload. fterefore, the personnel budget should be constructed first on the ratio of direct care hours to workload, that is, projected workload multiplied by the required hours per unit of work. Indirect time is added to this based either on a specific identification of the hours in the year that will be allocated to these activi- ties or on a current ratio of indirect to direct care hours. For example, if clinicians are currently spending an aver- age of 36 hours per week in direct patient activities and 4 hours per week in other organizational activities, 11% (4/36) needs to be added to the calculated direct care hours to project the total worked time. In the same way, paid time off must be added, calculated as the number of paid absent days projected, or, if there is variability, cur- rent paid absent days as a percent of total worked days.
Variable supplies can also be projected using a ratio of
current utilization to workload and projecting that same ratio into the future. ftis approach assumes that future utilization rates will mirror current ones. Changes in procedures, practices, or products could affect this, how- ever; and to the extent that those changes can be quanti- fied, it is possible to adjust the ratio. Current utilization relevant to the change can be replaced with the antici- pated utilization, and the ratio recalculated. Personnel and materials that are not volume-driven are projected based on function and analysis of current utilization. It is important to remember that all fixed resources become variable over the long range, so it is important to look at the overall growth of volume and workload to deter- mine whether the level of fixed resources continues to be sufficient.
When the projections of activity and resources have
been completed, they are translated into dollars. fte simple definition of total revenue is volume times price. However, this must be adjusted for the payer and pre- viously noted contractual variations. Personnel expenses are based on the salaries for the positions identified, in- cluding the cost of differentials, premiums, and fringe benefits. Nonsalary expenses will incorporate the exist- ing cost for projected materials and supplies adjusted for anticipated price increases and general inflation. fte revenues and expenses are totaled for the organization and the profit identified. If there is no profit—if the

projected expense exceeds the projected revenue—or if the level of profit is not at the level needed to achieve its fiscal goals (e.g., repayment of debt, cash for capital ex- penditures), the organization moves into the negotiation phase of the budget process. ftis is the most difficult phase of the process because the organization reviews its objectives and identifies steps to be taken to resolve the issue. If the conceptual plan, goals, and objectives for the budget were well thought out and clearly stated at the outset, and the activity and resources projected and quantified in relation to the plan, the negotiation phase is more likely to produce the budget plan that is most beneficial for the organization and its mission. Individ- ual participants need to speak to the priorities and re- quirements of specific departments or programs but also evaluate them in relation to the requirements of other areas and of the total organization.
fte final stage of budgeting, and the most import-
ant one, is implementation with evaluation. fte plans developed and refined through the rest of the process— initiatives, practice changes, productivity improvements, and new or expanded programs—now move into the operational life of the organization.
   Ongoing analysis identifies the extent to which ac- tual performance matches budget projections. fte or- ganization can thus adjust as needed to unanticipated events that may affect overall outcomes. fte analysis of actual to projected performance can be either fixed or flexible. Fixed budget analysis compares actual rev- enue and expense to the calculated budget. Variances may be favorable to budget—better than anticipated, that is, more revenue or less expense—or unfavorable to budget—not as good as anticipated, that is, less revenue or more expense. It is also important to understand the relationship between variances and the overall impact to the hospital. For example, unfavorable expense (such as increased staffing needs) may be related to favorable rev- enue (higher patient census). Whether the net of those two is favorable or unfavorable is key rather than looking at one variance in isolation.
fte limitation of this type of analysis is that it as-
sumes that the budget is static, unaffected by events or activities that differ from budget assumptions. Flexible budget analysis assumes a more dynamic budget, one in which the new information is incorporated but main- tains a similar profile as the fixed budget. For example,



staffing is aligned with patient days in the fixed budget. If patient days increase, it is expected that staffing will need to change. A flexible budget maintains the relationship but changes the budget to reflect the updated assump- tions. As an illustration, if six intensive care patients re- quire four nurses to care for them, a 3:2 patient-to-nurse ratio, nine patients will require six nurses. On a fixed budget analysis, the output—patients served—is fa- vorable to the budget because there are more patients served, and presumably more revenue, than projected. fte input, however, is unfavorable to the budget because there are more staff, and presumably more expense, than projected. On a flexible budget analysis, however, the 3:2 ratio of output to input remains constant, and the performance mirrors the budget. If the nine patients re- quire only five staff, the ratio is 3:1.8 and the actual per- formance is favorable to the budget on a flexible budget analysis even though the output and expense are unfa- vorable to the budget on a fixed analysis.
Clearly, there is a place for both types of analysis in
evaluating actual performance against projections. As noted in the discussion on cost concepts, although in the long run all costs are variable, in the short run some costs are variable and some are fixed. It is appropriate, therefore, to use a fixed budget analysis to evaluate fixed costs and a flexible budget analysis to evaluate variable costs (Finkler et al., 2019).

MANAGING RESOURCES

fte objective of financial management is to ensure that the organization generates a profit that is sufficient to maintain viability. fte purpose of ongoing budget analy- sis is to determine the extent to which the organization is meeting its targets over a given period or for a particular program or activity and to correct or improve its perfor- mance. Prudent management demands that the organi- zation maximize revenue and contain costs to generate profit or margin. Because both revenue and expenses are initially generated primarily by the clinicians who are providing services, it is important that all clinicians, including APNs, understand and appreciate their contri- bution to the fiscal soundness of the organization. In this context, it is necessary to emphasize that fiscal consider- ations do not drive the activities of the organization; it

is the mission, vision, and goals that determine direction and activities. However, the financial structure provides the framework for these activities and ensures the long- term viability of the organization.

Maximizing Revenue
Revenues are a composite of volume (the number of ser- vices provided) and price (income received for each ser- vice provided). Effective organizations ensure that they are generating as much income as possible. Fraudulent or deceptive practices such as billing for services not provided or providing unnecessary, expensive services clearly must be avoided. However, ethical strategies for maximizing revenues can be employed and can relate either to volume issues or price issues.
   Once an organizational activity passes the breakeven point—that is, the point at which revenue equals expense—any additional volume will generate profit, all else being equal. It is not surprising, therefore, that there is so much emphasis, especially in practices, on how much volume and revenue the individual practi- tioner generates. In fact, in incentive practices within larger organizations, financial rewards to practitioners are based on volume and productivity. fte measurement for identifying the individual practitioner’s contribution to the organization most frequently is based on services billed. ftere is a desire, and in many situations even a demand, to demonstrate that the individual clinician is generating enough revenue to cover salary and to con- tribute to profit. ftis has driven the very appropriate efforts of nurse practitioners (NPs) to secure billing privileges. (See Chapter 25 for a more extensive discus- sion of reimbursement issues.) However, this direct bill- ing is not available in all settings or through all payers. Even where it is available, it may not be advantageous to the practice for the NP to bill directly. Regardless, it is imperative to demonstrate their contribution to the practice and to develop other measures of volume and activity that can be used to evaluate the extent to which they are generating revenue. ftese measures will be internal to the organization but need to be regularly reported and evaluated in relation to the overall success of the practice. Such measures will be required as well in other circumstances where capitated or managed care payment systems do not accurately reflect through the



billing system the volume of activity generated for the practice by the APN.
   In other organizational settings, volume may be mea- sured by charges generated for particular procedures, tests, or services. ftis often leads clinicians to look for new ways of charging for various activities, assuming that this will maximize revenue and at the same time demonstrate their impact on revenue enhancement. In- creasing charges results in increased revenue potential from only a relatively small percentage of payers because of the decline of fee-for-service payment systems. Even this potential may not be realized because of exclusions or payment maximums set by the insurer.
   Rather than focusing on charges, therefore, it is more effective for APNs to address issues with systems or prac- tices that affect the volume of activity that is the basis for payment. Under Medicare’s prospective payment system, for example, payment is based on the number of patients discharged within specific DRGs. If the length of stay per discharge can be reduced, a greater volume of patients can be admitted. What are the systems or practice issues that increase the length of stay without adding therapeutic value for the patient? What processes could occur before admission or subsequent to discharge that would reduce the length of stay? What services need to be provided that will attract patients to the facility? Consideration of these questions has led to a variety of approaches that ultimately result in increased volume, for example, pre- admission testing and evaluation with same-day admis- sion for surgical patients; telephone triage and follow-up or home visit programs; clinical pathways, case manage- ment, and discharge planning programs; protocols to prevent or promote early identification and treatment of complications of hospitalization such as nosocomial in- fections or pressure injuries; or enhancing and expanding specific services such as cardiology or oncology. APNs in the inpatient setting are uniquely positioned to influence the efforts that affect volume. ftese practitioners can identify approaches through study and analysis of exist- ing systems and research on best practices. ftey can have significant input into the development of programs or protocols as part of the multidisciplinary team. ftey may support the implementation of changes through clinical evaluation, consultation, and education. Finally, APNs may be the most appropriate clinicians to manage the particular program or activity.
  
Another mechanism to both increase revenue and reflect the level of services provided to a patient is to ensure that all services rendered are reflected on the bill with the appropriate charge. “Charge capture,” or doc- umenting and charging for all billable services, can be a time-consuming and administrative burden. However, accurately capturing services not only improves reim- bursement in the short term but is also used by external agencies to impact reimbursement rates as well as cal- culate and publish quality and acuity scores. fterefore, these additional services become key to accurately re- flecting the resource allocation for the level of care that is being provided.
In addition to adding volume, revenue can be in-
creased by increasing reimbursement rates, the amount that the organization is actually paid for each product or service. However, this deceptively simple strategy is constrained by regulatory, contractual, political, and economic considerations. With the increasing trend in price transparency, public opinion can also be a con- straint. Actual reimbursement is determined by govern- ment regulation, contract negotiation, or organizational definition. Government-regulated reimbursement, such as for Medicare or Medicaid, is not organization spe- cific and, although concerted lobbying efforts may have some impact, the potential for change is limited. Organizations may present evidence that they qualify for certain levels of reimbursement, for example, for direct medical education benefits, but otherwise will have little opportunity to affect payment levels. Reimbursement rates set through contract negotiations have a greater potential for change but only during the period of open contract negotiations. Because the negotiation outcome needs to be satisfactory to both parties, and because both parties as business organizations are interested in maxi- mizing their profit, rate increases preferred by one party may need to be tempered to be acceptable to the other party. Charges defined by the organization can be in- creased, but the associated reimbursement rates may not change based on contract terms related to price increases (Finkler et al., 2019).
To  maximize revenue, organizations must success-
fully implement strategies to ensure that the organiza- tion receives all the revenue to which it is entitled under the existing regulations, contractual obligations, and pricing structure. Payment for services is contingent on



the organization demonstrating that it has in fact pro- vided the relevant service or product. Different payers have varying requirements in the way that claims are processed, the forms that are used, and the specific data that are included. It is important, therefore, to under- stand what is required, where it needs to be recorded, and how it is presented to the payer.
   All payers will require some level of detail on the ser- vices provided. ftis may be in the form of an itemized statement of all billable charges for an episode of care or the specification of relevant codes. Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) and Resource-Based Relative Value Scales (RBRVS) are coding systems developed by the American Medical Association (AMA) and adapted by the government to identify cost procedures and services provided by clinicians. fte International Classification of Diseases, 10th modification (ICD-10), is developed by the World Health Organization (WHO) and adapted for use in the United States by the federal government. It classifies diseases by system or category (e.g., blood dis- orders, neoplasms, infectious diseases) and may be used alone or in conjunction with other classification systems. DRGs and APCs, as discussed earlier, are used for Medi- care claims for inpatient and outpatient hospital services and for selected nongovernmental payers.** Certain pay- ers may also require evidence of preauthorization for spe- cific procedures or treatments or referral authorization for specialty evaluation and management. Clinicians in many practices or in ambulatory settings may be more directly involved in identifying the appropriate code for the services rendered and must have a thorough under- standing of the coding system and the relationship of codes to services provided. In other settings, coding may not be done by the clinicians; rather, the codes are deter- mined based on information that the clinicians provide. fte source document for information for coding and billing is the patient’s medical record. Documentation in the medical record validates to the payer that the billed services were provided and justifies the organization’s claim for payment. Inaccurate or incomplete documen- tation can lead to lost revenue opportunities if the coders

** Case mix classifications are used for reimbursement in other sectors of the health-care system by both governmental and private sector payers: Home Health Resource Groups (HHRGs) and the Outcome and Assessment Information Set (OASIS) in home care; the Minimum Data Set (MDS) and Resource Utilization Groups (RUGs) for long-term care (Cleverly et al., 2018).

are unable to identify all the services that can appropri- ately be charged (Finkler et al., 2019).
   Reimbursement is negatively affected by payer deni- als and delays. Payers may deny reimbursement for ser- vices not covered (excluded from reimbursement based on the patient’s policy or the contractual agreement with the organization) or for services not authorized (lack- ing required prior approval from the payer or from a designated clinician). Payment may also be denied for services deemed by the payer to be incompatible with the diagnosis, medically unnecessary, or not adequately validated. Payers who reimburse for hospital care on a per diem basis may carve out days for payment denial if delays in scheduling tests or consultations or in initiat- ing discharge planning and referrals result in additional, otherwise avoidable inpatient days. Billing challenges by payers may also result in payment denials if supporting documentation does not appear in the medical record that the billed services were in fact rendered. Payers will audit records to validate that billed services have been provided even after payments have been made. If there is not adequate supporting documentation, the organi- zation is at risk not only for repayments but also for ad- ditional financial penalties.
Inadequate documentation can lead to delays in bill-
ing if additional information needs to be accumulated before coding determinations can be made. Lack of compliance with payers’ filing requirements may also result in denial of payment. Claims that are questioned initially may be resubmitted with additional evidence of the validity of the claim; however, this involves rework and delays. In addition, most payers have a filing limit, a defined period in which a “clean” bill is presented in order for the organization to be reimbursed at all. De- lays in processing and submitting bills and generating reimbursement, whether related to incomplete docu- mentation or because of other systems issues, may also result in a lost income opportunity for the organization. Money that the organization has received can be in- vested to generate interest income. Accruals in accounts receivable—that is, income that is anticipated but not yet received—does not generate any additional revenue for the organization.
fte APN in a practice setting that bills directly or
indirectly for the practitioner’s clinical activity needs a clear understanding of the requirements and systems for



billing—what can be billed, how it is processed, what documentation is required, and time frames for billing. By following through on these requirements, the APN is able to contribute directly to the timely and accurate generation of income. In other settings, the APN with an understanding of the systems for reimbursement to the organization contributes indirectly by providing and promoting accurate and complete clinical documenta- tion, identifying systems issues that can generate de- lays in the billing cycle, and supporting practices that enhance the potential for maximizing revenue. For ex- ample, in the inpatient setting, an NP caring for a com- plex patient with multiple comorbidities may be able to increase reimbursement by assessing and documenting each of the patient problems and interventions. Address- ing the patient’s DRG alone may limit reimbursement and not acknowledge expenses generated from addi- tional care needs.

Containing Costs
fte volume of products or services produced drives the total expenses of an organization. ftese costs are a func- tion both of intensity, or the extent of resources required for each unit of volume, and of price, or the cost to the organization of individual resource units. Cost contain- ment focuses on identifying the least costly alternatives for supplying the personnel and materials to produce these services or products. In addressing cost contain- ment, the organization evaluates the alternatives not only in terms of total expenditures but also in relation to potential impact on other aspects of the organization. It is less costly to pay lower salaries, but if salaries are not competitive in the market, costly vacancies and turnover are likely to result. Inferior products that are less costly to purchase may initially save money but in the long term may generate additional expense in replacement, rework, decreased customer satisfaction, and loss of business. fte desired alternative, therefore, is the least costly alterna- tive that is consistent with the mission and goals of the organization.
Wage and salary expenses constitute a significant pro-
portion of the costs in health-care organizations. Market forces, regulatory requirements, and ethical personnel management practices provide a framework for per- sonnel expenditures. Within this framework, however,

the organization has flexibility in controlling expenses related both to intensity and price of personnel resources used. Intensity addresses the number of personnel or staff hours required to manage a given patient popula- tion. fte volume and type of patients and their particu- lar care needs—the workload generated by that patient population—drive the personnel resources required. Measuring and managing workload variability can pro- vide opportunities for cost containment. For example, scheduling staff in consideration of daily, weekly, or sea- sonal volume variations can minimize expensive “down time” as well as staff frustration resulting from inadequate staffing at busy times. ftis requires an ongoing analysis of workload patterns and trends to identify recurring variations. Unexpected variations may be addressed with the use of overtime or outside agency personnel. Both of these alternatives are more expensive than the normal personnel costs for the workload involved but are justifi- able for unpredictable workload variations. A consistent increase in activity, however, requires a consistent plan for managing the workload. If a practice is increasingly seeing patients later than the usual scheduled hours and incurring overtime and other increased costs because of it, it is worthwhile to analyze the cause of the variation. System inefficiencies may be delaying patient through- put and thus generating additional unnecessary expenses that can be eliminated by addressing the inefficiencies. Patterns of patient scheduling may be changing, result- ing in fewer visits scheduled earlier in the day with more downtime, suggesting that scheduled staff hours need to be adjusted to accommodate patient preferences. How- ever, the variation may be the result of a net increase in numbers of patients and visits. If this is so, an analysis of the fiscal impact of the increased revenue and increased expense may demonstrate that adding regular staff to cover the increased activity will be more cost effective than continuing to use overtime.
Intensity of personnel resource utilization may also
be related to inefficient clinical practices. Routines, procedures, and protocols that are based on tradition (“we’ve always done it this way”) rather than on analy- sis or research-based evidence may include unnecessary and time-consuming activities that do not add value for desired outcomes. How are medication administration times determined? What are the indicators that deter- mine the level of support for activities of daily living that



each patient requires? How frequently is it necessary to monitor vital signs on postoperative patients? In what circumstances are isolation precautions instituted and under what circumstances can they be discontinued? How effective are the standard protocols for preparation for tests? Do the standard patient teaching tools and programs result in patient learning? Does the timing of drawing blood for laboratory tests make sense in relation to the timing of meals or medication administration or other treatments? It may be instructive to evaluate the care that patients with the same condition receive from different caregivers or in different settings to determine whether differences in practices result in differences in outcomes. In some circumstances it may become evident that practices in one setting are more resource intensive but do not add value and can be adapted or eliminated. For personnel resources, price is generally equated with the cost of salaries and benefits. Containing costs by reducing salaries or benefits is not often possible given market conditions and the mobility of today’s workforce. It is possible, however, to ensure that the least costly re- sources are used in any given situation. Overtime, for example, is a very expensive way to staff. It is effective for the occasional unanticipated increase in workload but extensive, continuous use of overtime requires identifi-
cation of causes and alternative approaches.
   In addition to volume increases, variability in work- load practices, or system inefficiencies, overtime may be related to the capabilities of the staff involved. For example, inexperienced staff may need assistance with complex patient issues or with development of organi- zational skills, or experienced staff may be struggling with unfamiliar procedures or patient conditions. For these staff, education and mentoring can promote de- veloping competencies that also increase efficiency and ultimately reduce the overtime. fte mix of staff may not be appropriate or the total numbers of staff may not be sufficient for the workload experienced. In these circum- stances, it can be less costly to provide more skilled staff or more total staff at regular salaries than to continue with overtime.
One approach addresses the mix of personnel and the
perceived advantages of reducing the numbers of pro- fessional staff and substituting less expensive unlicensed assistive personnel (UAP). In some circumstances, this may be effective; however, given the increasing acuity of

patients, such substitution may be counterproductive. In acute care settings, for example, patients are requiring more and more complex care, much of which cannot be delegated to unlicensed staff. In addition, unlicensed staff increase the workload of the professional staff be- cause they assume the added responsibility of directing and supervising the UAP. For direct care, in some in- stances, it may be less costly to have a higher percentage of licensed staff and fewer total numbers than to have a lower percentage of licensed staff and greater total num- bers. However, if the professional staff are responsible for clerical or environmental tasks that can appropriately be delegated to less costly personnel, providing those sup- ports can be an effective cost management approach.
Cost-containment efforts can also address some of the
hidden costs in personnel management. Turnover gener- ates significant costs in recruiting, hiring, and orienting new personnel. Additional costs may be incurred before the new employee is available if vacancies need to be covered with overtime or more expensive outside agency personnel. Programs to promote staff retention can there- fore be valuable in reducing turnover and its associated costs. Absenteeism can also be costly. Some level of un- anticipated absenteeism caused by illness is anticipated. However, staff dissatisfaction, unmanageable workloads, frequent excessive overtime requirements, or on-the-job injuries can also contribute to high levels of absenteeism. fte cost is increased by the need for replacements, again often with overtime or agency personnel. In addition, costs to the organization for workers’ compensation are directly related to the number of claims filed out of the organization. Cost can be lowered—and, potentially, staff satisfaction and efficiency increased—by identifying and addressing the factors contributing to absenteeism and on-the-job injuries.
Similar to wages and salaries, the costs for supplies
and equipment are affected by market issues and regula- tory requirements as well as by the volume and intensity of services provided. Intensity in this context refers to the number and kind of materials used for these services. Cost containment looks at the least costly alternative to providing the services. ftis can be addressed on two levels. What are the specific supplies and equipment re- quired for a particular procedure, protocol, or service? In addition, given that a specific item is required, which is the best product to select among the alternatives



available? In relation to the first question, it is important to look at the work and how it is accomplished. Materi- als assumed to be necessary for the service provided may incorporate items that are no longer necessary, do not add value, or are useful only to a subset of the patients receiving the service.
   With the materials necessary for a service identified, the focus moves to selection of specific items among those available. Product evaluation requires the involve- ment of clinicians and others in the organization. In- herent in the identification of an item as necessary for a particular service is the description of its purpose and how it is to be used. fte primary concern in product evaluation is how well the different products under re- view meet these criteria. Other criteria also need to be considered such as availability from the manufacturer and storage and maintenance requirements. A product that meets all clinical criteria but cannot be produced and delivered on a timely basis or has high maintenance (and associated downtime) potential may not be prefer- able to a less exotic but more available and reliable prod- uct. Similarly, when presented with clinically equivalent products, cost should also be considered in the product evaluation.
Prices for materials and supplies are negotiated with
vendors. Organizations may identify cost-containment opportunities in the course of these negotiations through volume discounts or as part of purchasing groups. ftis raises the issue of managing the tension between stan- dardization and customization. Frequently, standard- izing supplies and equipment across service areas has significant benefits in reducing the expense for purchas- ing, storing, distributing, and using specific products. Although this limits the range of products available to the clinician, it also limits the time needed to become fa- miliar with the product, to develop ease in working with it, and to use it in a variety of settings. It may, however, generate some level of waste if, for example, a standard- ized pack of supplies for a particular procedure contains items that are used in most, but not all, situations. Cus- tomization, on the other hand, matches the products spe- cifically to the individual patient, clinician, or situation. It can have advantages in being more effective in achiev- ing the desired outcome or in reducing the potential for waste. However, customization sometimes is more a matter of individual clinicians’ preferences than of value

added for the patient. It is important, then, to evaluate the pros and cons of standardization or customization in specific circumstances to identify the least costly al- ternative. In general, for products and processes that are used in a variety of settings, standardization is preferable not only because of the cost and productivity benefits but also because it promotes consistency in providing services. Alternatives to standardization should be un- dertaken only after careful evaluation to ensure that the marginal benefit of customization—that is, the greater value that accrues from the alternative—outweighs the fiscal and operational benefits of standardization.
As the previous discussions suggest, the  appropriate-
ness of measures to contain costs cannot be evaluated in isolation from outcomes. Cost efficiency identifies the minimum expenditure necessary to achieve an outcome. Cost-effectiveness identifies the minimum expenditure necessary to achieve the outcome that is consistent with the organization’s mission and goals. Cost-effectiveness, therefore, incorporates an element of quality that is not inherent in cost efficiency. Vacuum-assisted dressing for postsurgical wound healing is significantly more expen- sive than traditional dressings and would not be consid- ered cost efficient in a simple analysis that only addressed the expense incurred for dressings until wound healing is achieved. However, because it accelerates wound healing, this intervention reduces the necessary length of hospi- talization and extent of postsurgical follow-up. As such, it is certainly cost effective with benefits for both the patient and the provider organization. In some circum- stances, quality measures are not sufficiently developed to allow precise measurement of cost-effectiveness; but, to the extent that such measures are available or can be approximated, they should be incorporated into analysis. Cost-effectiveness and cost efficiency are typically an- alyzed using productivity measures or cost-benefit analy- sis. Productivity is the relationship of inputs and outputs, of resources used and products or services produced. Productivity relationships are expressed as ratios and can focus either on the output or on the input. Focusing on the output addresses the question, “What does it take to produce the output?” and is the ratio of input to output, or resources divided by products or services. Examples of productivity measures focusing on output include hours per patient day, cost per procedure, and visits per episode of care. Focusing on input addresses the question, “How



well are resources being used?” and is the ratio of output to input, or products or services divided by resources. Examples of productivity measures focusing on input in- clude visits per full-time equivalent (FTE), tests per staff hour, and case hours per available room hour. Productiv- ity improves when output remains constant and input decreases, or when output increases and input stays con- stant. Productivity declines when output remains con- stant and input increases, or when output decreases and input stays constant. Productivity ratios are of little value in isolation. Comparisons of productivity ratios to targets set during the budgeting process, to historical experience and trends, and to other internal or external benchmarks are valuable for analysis and identification of opportuni- ties for increasing efficiency and effectiveness.
Cost-benefit analysis is frequently used to evaluate a
particular program or project, or to compare programs, approaches, or activities competing for resource alloca- tion. fte analysis compares the revenues and expenses generated by the program to determine the net benefit (income minus expense) or the ratio of benefits to costs (income divided by expense). Determining the value of the program to the organization, however, is not done ex- clusively by analysis of the financial benefit. Benefits and costs that are difficult to quantify, such as social benefits and costs, opportunity costs, public relations value, and loss-leader opportunities, may be of considerable impor- tance to the organization and influence decisions to im- plement or continue specific projects and programs.
Productivity is often focused on personnel resource
utilization, but the concept also applies to material re- sources and to the overall utilization of services. Length of stay or number of days per inpatient stay, for example, can be considered to be a productivity measurement that identifies the relationship between the episode of care (output) and the patient days, representing the aggre- gated resources required to provide for that episode (in- put). Comparisons are made among patients or groups of patients for a given time period or across multiple time periods and against internal and external benchmarks. Productivity improves if the length of stay (and associ- ated expense) decreases for the same level of activity.
Cost-benefit analysis can identify the impact of pro-
ductivity improvements for the organization. Baseline analysis of the net benefit (revenue minus expense) iden- tifies the profit margin. Productivity improvements are

designed to increase the profit margin by reducing the cost (but maintaining consistent income) for each epi- sode of care. Moreover, decreasing length of stay has the added opportunity of creating capacity for additional volume. ftat volume will generate additional income as well as additional expense. Assuming a consistent pa- tient population, if the cost per episode of care remains the same, the total profit (income minus expense) will increase, although the profit per case remains the same. However, the cost per episode of care may well decrease (as fixed costs are spread over more cases) and enhance both the total profit and the profit per case. Cost-benefit analysis can also identify potential negative aspects of productivity improvement efforts. Length-of-stay re- ductions must be consistent with good clinical practice. Early discharge of patients may be clinically premature and result in readmission of the patient for continua- tion of care. Obviously, for the patient this is an unde- sirable outcome and therefore could not be considered cost effective. It cannot even be considered cost efficient because many payers, particularly those who reimburse on a cost per case, identify a time period after discharge during which a readmission (for a condition related to the original hospital stay) will be bridged to the original admission. Additional expense will be incurred, but the merged admissions will be considered as one episode for the purposes of reimbursement and additional payment will be denied (Finkler et al., 2019).

SUMMARY


Reimbursement levels and the associated incentives to contain costs are to a large extent payer driven. Reim- bursement systems structured as fee-for-service include little incentive for the provider organization to contain costs. For a minority of payers, reimbursement is gen- erated by charges that are paid either in full or at some negotiated percentage so that increased utilization results in increased revenue. fte majority of payers, however, have built into their reimbursement systems some incen- tives for containing costs. Reimbursement at the per visit rate is an incentive to reduce resource utilization and in- crease efficiency for that visit. Reimbursement based on cases (DRG-based, for example) build in incentives to re- duce the length of stay as well as the resource utilization



during the stay. Capitated reimbursement systems create the additional incentive to reduce the number of epi- sodes of care—admissions or visits. Individual payer variations add complexity for providers and consumers. Some, for example, may offer additional payments for achieving specific clinical quality outcomes with defined patient populations such as pediatric asthma patients or adult-onset diabetic patients. Others may have payment tiers for certain benefits with different consumer copay- ments for different levels of services (generic versus brand pharmaceuticals, for example) (Finkler et al., 2019).
   Clinicians, however, generally are not attuned to in- corporating reimbursement variables into clinical deci- sion making for individual patients and prefer to provide care that is “payer-blind.” ftey do have a responsibility, however, to promote efficiency in the allocation and uti- lization of health-care resources and not only for the via- bility of the organization within which they practice. As health-care costs escalate, insured patients increasingly are at risk for higher out-of-pocket costs, including de- ductibles in the thousands instead of the hundreds of dollars before the insurer assumes liability, and they are entitled to value for their expenditure. In addition, social justice demands that constrained resources be used judi- ciously to ensure the maximum availability of health care to all members of society. In addition, with increased emphasis and transparency related to cost, patients are now making choices not only on clinical criteria but also on cost. fte most appropriate approach for clinicians, therefore, is to provide cost efficient and effective care for all patients regardless of payer.
Fortunately,  inmanycircumstances,  cost-containment
efforts developed to accommodate a given payment

expand the cardiac program or the pediatric program; replace the ventilators in the critical care units or the ultrasounds in the echocardiology laboratory; construct additional ambulatory facilities or additional inpatient facilities? Such decisions will require compromise and consensus and a clear understanding of the benefits not only for the organization but also for the staff and, most important, for the patient. APNs have the knowledge and expertise to provide clinical input to these decisions and to advocate for the patient. In addition, to have a credible voice in this decision-making process, they must also have a clear understanding of the business and fiscal issues that affect resource allocation and management.


FOR MORE INFORMATION

modality can be designed to benefit—or at least not	 	

disadvantage—patients of other payers as well. Programs to reduce length of stay, efforts to improve productivity, analyses to identify the most cost-effective products, and benchmarking to identify best practices may be initiated because of the structure of one payment methodology, but their beneficial effects need not be limited to patients of that insurer type. However, because resources are not unlimited, in different circumstances difficult choices need to be made. Organizations can rarely respond to all requests for resources and often are in the position of needing to select among competing priorities that may all be necessary and worthwhile. Should the organization

American Hospital Association: Hospital Billing Explained (2020). Retrievedfromhttps://www.aha.org/factsheet/2015-03-18-hospital
-billing-explained
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2020). Retrieved from   https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient
-Assessment-Instruments/Value-Based-Programs/HAC/Hospital
-Acquired-Conditions
Patient Outpatient Prospective Payment System (2020, March). Re- trieved	from	https://www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-Education
/Medicare-Learning-Network-MLN/MLNProducts/Downloads
/HospitalOutpaysysfctsht.pdf
Patient Safety Network: Never Events (2019, September 7). Retrieved from https://psnet.ahrq.gov/primer/never-events















Mediated Roles
Working With and Through Other People
Thomas D. Smith, Maria L. Vezina, Mary E. Samost, and Kelly Reilly




Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Explore the relational mechanisms of working with and through others as an advanced practice nurse (APN).
• Apply the six APN core competencies to practice.
• Compare and contrast models of APN collaboration.
• Demonstrate APN leadership roles in interprofessional teams.
• Develop a framework to align professional nursing connections.




ADVANCED PRACTICE AND PARTNERSHIPS

fte four established advanced practice roles—certified nurse practitioner (CNP), clinical nurse specialist (CNS), certified nurse-midwife (CNM), and certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA)—reflect significant evolution of the nursing profession and nursing practice over the past five decades. Progress in role development and ad- vanced practice nurse (APN) integration into health-care
200

teams have yielded positive outcomes; however, barri- ers related to scope of practice (SOP) persist. Patel and colleagues (2019) found that full state-level NP SOP is associated with improved quality and access to care; whereas in states with restricted SOP, patients rate quality of care delivered by NPs as lower (Cimiotti et al., 2019). fte APRN Consensus Model addresses some of the is- sues of role definition and SOP for the four APN roles (National Council of State Boards of Nursing [NCSBN], 2008). fte implementation mechanism for the APRN



Consensus Model is licensure, accreditation, certifica- tion, and education (LACE) (Stanley, 2009). fte APRN Consensus Model/LACE standardizes APN SOP, in- creases patient access to care, and promotes greater value and mobility for the APN within the national health-care system (Rounds et al., 2013). It also serves to support one of the recommendations of the Institute of Medicine’s (IOM’s) report The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health (IOM, 2011) to remove SOP barriers (Stubenrauch, 2010). fte Committee for Removing Bar- riers to Practice and Care Report, authored by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation/AARP Foundation, found significant progress toward reducing SOP restrictions with increases in full-practice status to 22 states (2020). Additionally, there is currently legislative activity pending in the following states, which promises significant gains for APNs: California, Indiana, Kansas, Louisiana, Massa- chusetts, Mississippi, Missouri, New Jersey, North Caro- lina, Ohio, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Wisconsin (RWF/ AARP, 2020). fte National Academy of Medicine’s Fu- ture of Nursing 2020–2030 Consensus Study is research- ing current and future challenges, including training and competency development of APNs to lead efforts to build a culture of health and equity. According to Nurs- ing’s Social Policy Statement (American Nurses Association [ANA], 2015), these roles involve specialization, expan- sion, advancement, and autonomy, suggesting the nec- essary skills of managing people, the organization, and the environment of care. According to the IOM (2011), “more than a quarter of a million nurses are APRNs who hold master’s or doctoral degrees and pass national certification exams. APRNs deliver primary, acute, and medical home care as well as other types of health-care services. For example, they teach and counsel patients to understand their health problems and what they can do to get better, they coordinate care and advocate for pa- tients in the complex health-care system, and they refer patients to physicians and other health-care providers” (p. 52). Specifically, the CNS role centers on the synthe- sis, integration, transformation, and translation of best practices as articulated in the literature (National Asso- ciation of Clinical Nurse Specialists [NACNS], 2007). Davies and Hughes (1995) note that “the term advanced nursing practice extends beyond roles. It is a way of think- ing and viewing the world based on clinical knowledge, rather than a composition of roles” (p. 157). ftis view of

the world is an interactive process that emphasizes direct and indirect partnerships with both patients and a di- verse group of health-care providers. In addition to clin- ical competency, the varied aspects of advanced practice also require socialization and interpersonal skills to form the foundation for collaboration, consultation, and clin- ical leadership. Although advanced practice roles require autonomy and authority to be fully enacted, the ability to achieve patient and system outcomes is dependent on partnerships with others to manage interdependent and interdisciplinary relationships. In fact, the NACNS (2007) concluded that “the synergy of working with, leading and coordinating teams of professionals in a highly communicative, focused care environment regard- less of setting, will continue to be the hallmark of prac- tice into the future” (p. 8). According to Bleich (2011), APNs, as either “master’s or doctorally prepared clinical scholars, may not have the extent of formal education in advanced research methods and statistical techniques, but they are nonetheless critical to clinical inquiry at the point-of-care and evidence-driven decision making within the organizational context. fteir clinical expertise and advanced knowledge of nursing practice can be used in partnership with nurses prepared with research-based doctoral degrees. APNs need to engage in a full range of scholarly activities that include research, evidence-based practice, performance improvement, teaching and learn- ing, and dissemination to influence and improve the quality of care provided to patients, families, and popula- tions (Pape, 2000). Inter- and intra-professional connec- tivity will optimize nursing’s impact in advancing health via the synergy that bridges scientific knowledge genera- tion with translational expertise at the point of care. ftis synergy may also serve to link nursing better with other health-care professions, giving nurses a stronger voice in decision-making forums and at policy tables” (Bleich, 2011, pp. 169–170).

CORE COMPETENCIES


APNs function as clinicians using evidence-based knowledge to provide direct care, diagnose and manage health-care problems, coordinate services, educate pa- tients and families, advocate for patients, and manage the health-care system in all its dimensions. ftis approach to



care supports the continued focus on disease prevention, health maintenance, and resolution of functional prob- lems (IOM, 2004). In The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health, the IOM (2011) stated that “nurses are developing new competencies for the future to help bridge the gap between coverage and access, to coordinate increasingly complex care for a wider range of patients, to fulfill their potential as primary care provid- ers to the full extent of their education and training, to implement system-wide changes that take into account the growing body of evidence linking nursing practice to fundamental improvements in patient safety and quality of care, and to capture the full economic value of their contributions across practice settings” (pp. 53–54).
Accordingly, six core competencies, as shown in
Figure 12.1, further define advanced nursing practice. ftese competencies have consistently been identi-
fied as essential features of advanced practice (American Association of Colleges of Nursing, 1996; Davies & Hughes, 1995; NACNS, 2004, 2010; National Council of State Boards of Nursing, 2006):
1. Coaching: skillful guidance and teaching to advance the care of patients, families, groups of patients, other care providers, and the profession of nursing















Figure 12.1 Core Competencies of Advanced Nursing Practice
2. 
Consultation: patient-, staff-, or system-focused in- teraction between professionals in which expertise is utilized for problem-solving
3. Research skills: interpretation, translation, use of ev- idence, evaluation of clinical practice, and conduct- ing and active participation in research
4. Clinical and professional leadership: the ability to manage change and empower others to influence clinical practice and political processes within and across the system
5. Collaboration: working with intra- and interdisci- plinary teams toward achieving optimal patient and family goals
6. Ethical decision-making skills: identifying, articu- lating, and taking action on ethical concerns at the patient, family, provider, system, community, and public policy levels
   Given this overview of core competencies, the theme of relationships within the health-care arena is evident. fte ability to work with and through others is inherent within these competencies and consequently indicates a strong foundation for practice. Although not explic- itly stated in definitions of advanced practice, there is an understanding within interprofessional teams that APNs must be skillful in and cognizant of the key ele- ments of their partnerships with patients, families, and other health team members. Managing the interpersonal strategies of providing care is critical to success as an independent care provider in a competitive health-care environment. For example, care previously provided by APNs in the complex, acute setting is transitioning into the community, thereby increasing the need for APNs to assess their strengths to provide accountable practice while working successfully with other providers. Accord- ing to the IOM (2004), to meet the challenges of their practice environment, APNs need a strong foundation of clinical practice, specialty expertise, and a rigorous graduate education.
With reference to the six core competencies, several
interpersonal themes emerge:
1. Coaching—skilled guidance and teaching of pa- tients, families, other care providers—is both a for- mal and an informal role for the APN. As mentors, APNs develop others to either take the lead or share the pathway of care. As formal teachers, APNs assist in the application and evaluation of evidence-based



practice in determining and improving the quality of health-care delivery.
2. Consultation is the direct involvement of another practitioner, which denotes the need to confirm findings, diagnosis, and plan of care. fte responsi- bility for care, however, rests with the primary prac- titioner. Consultation can require an overlap within the same specialty for an added opinion or a discus- sion with a specialist for another view or preference of treatment. In either situation, the partnership is necessary for optimal patient care and a deliberate approach in solving problems and managing care.
3. Research of a practice discipline includes conduct- ing systematic and scholarly inquiry, interpretation, and use of evidence in clinical practice and quality improvement. APN competencies in translating re- search into practice, designing innovations based on new knowledge, and integrating quality evidence are keys in achieving optimal outcomes (Riley & Omery, 1996). Innovative change is possible when health-care professionals come together to redesign clinical practices. APNs also contribute in the care of research participants through supporting accu- rate, reliable, and ethical study implementation. Additionally, APNs need to participate in and con- tribute to creating policies and procedures and care standards for implementing clinical research across the continuum of health-care settings (National In- stitutes of Health [NIH], 2010).
4. Clinical, professional, and system leadership can be
powerful when approached in an interdisciplinary manner. Leadership competencies of APNs are re- quired for assessing and influencing nursing practice and patient outcomes in populations, health-care systems, regulatory requirements, and health-care finance. Although the unique roles of distinct profes- sions are useful within the framework of individual competencies, in patient care the leadership of a team is a supportive experience for patients, especially for those with limited access to a health system and those with complex care needs. A focus on the specific pa- tient and not on professional turf issues requires skill in leadership and change agency. In this realm, the blurring of roles is often helpful and not hurtful.
5. According to Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dic-
tionary, 11th edition (2020), collaboration means “to work together, especially in a joint intellectual

effort.” fte ANA (2015) Guide to Nursing’s Social Policy Statement cites qualities of collaboration such as a common focus, recognition of another’s exper- tise, and a collegial exchange of ideas and knowledge and recognizes that nurses uniquely contribute to the wider conversation addressing the health needs of society. Hamric and Hanson (2019) refer to col- laboration as a dynamic, interpersonal process in which individuals make a commitment to each other to interact authentically and constructively to solve problems and to learn from each other in order to accomplish identified goals, purposes, or outcomes. By definition, then, collaboration identifies relation- ships and involves an interpersonal process. fte focus of the relationship needs to be positive and grounded in a problem-solving approach, creating interdepen- dence as a mutually fulfilling experience between the involved parties. Although collaboration is a corner- stone of many APN roles, it eludes some clinicians. Consequently, models of collaboration have emerged to assist in structuring relationships and guiding the process of working partnerships.
6. Ethical decision-making skills are a central com-
ponent of effective advanced practice. According to ftompson and ftompson (1985), “To be pro- fessional is to be ethical, and to practice ethically requires an understanding of ethics, values, and oneself.” fte goal of ethical practice is to do the right thing for the right reason. Although grounded in an individual’s values and presentation of self, the inclusion of the team in ethical decision making is key to the holistic care of patients. Ethical clinical practice requires an atmosphere of trust, mutual respect, transparency, and commitment to critical thinking and reasoning. To create this atmosphere, APNs, as the managers of care, need to work with others in an inclusive manner so as to build a team whereby the ability to express values, feelings, be- liefs, and knowledge can be encouraged and ensured as the ethical dimension of practice emerges.

MODELS OF COLLABORATION


fte basis of collaboration is the belief that high-quality patient care is achieved by including the contributions of all care providers. In The Future of Nursing: Leading



Change, Advancing Health, the IOM (2011) stated that “being a full partner transcends all levels of the nursing profession and requires leadership skills and competen- cies that must be applied within the profession and in collaboration with other health professionals” (p. 35). fte Macy Foundation (2010) states that “mounting research shows that health care delivered by nurses, doctors, and other health-care professionals working in teams not only improves quality, but also leads to better patient outcomes, greater patient satisfaction, improved efficiency and increased job satisfaction on the part of health professionals” (p. 2). A study by Ci- miotti et al. (2019) found an increase in the quality outcomes of NPs when organizations create an envi- ronment that supports NP practice. Collaboration is often cited as the “key to success” for any initiative that extends beyond an individual’s scope of activity. Collaboration is therefore the foundation of effective patient care. According to Arcongelo et al. (1996), a variety of interpersonal attributes are necessary for suc- cessful collaboration. ftese include trust, knowledge, shared responsibility, mutual respect, positive com- munication, cooperation, coordination, and optimism (p. 107). See Figure 12.2. fte authors define these attributes as follows:
• Trust among all parties establishes a high-quality working relationship; it develops over time as the parties become more acquainted and establish norms. According to Hamric et al. (2014) trust also depends on clinical competence (p. 306).

Collaboration Is the Key to Success

Trust Knowledge
Shared responsibilities Mutual respect Communication Cooperation
Optimism
Figure 12.2 Collaboration Attributes
• 
Knowledge is a necessary component for the develop- ment of trust. Knowledge and trust remove the need for supervision.
• Shared responsibility suggests joint decision making for
quality patient care and outcomes, as well as account- able practice, within the organization.
• Mutual respect for the expertise of all members of the
team is a linchpin to successful collaboration. ftis re- spect is communicated to the patient.
• Communication that is not hierarchical but rather two
way ensures the sharing of patient information and knowledge. Two-way communication between equals serves as a framework for difficult conversations. Questioning of the approach to care of either partner cannot be delivered in a manner that is construed as criticism but as a method to enhance knowledge and improve patient care.
• Cooperation and coordination promote the use of the
skills of all team members, prevent duplication of effort, enhance the productivity of practice, and im- prove the patient’s experience of care.
• Optimism promotes successful teamwork when the
involved parties believe that collaboration is the more effective means of promoting high-quality care.
   Although these attributes are key in any collaborative relationship, it is primarily the unique contribution of each member of the team that determines a successful outcome.
   Although there are several models of collaborative practice, they often are distinguished by their responses to two questions:
1. How is the expertise of each team member used to the fullest?
2. Who is responsible for decision making and patient care?
   Table 12.1 summarizes three practice models com- monly used in primary care (Strumpf & Whitney, 1994) and one model being adopted in various health-care settings (Arcongelo et al., 1996; Matthews & Brown, 2013): the parallel model, the sequential model, the shared model, and the collaborative model.
   In the parallel model, the APN manages stable pa- tients, and the physician cares for those who are more medically complex. In the sequential model, the APN


   Table 12.1	
Models of Collaborative Practice

Parallel ModelSequential ModelShared ModelCollaborative ModelAPN role in patient careManage stable patientsPerform intake assessmentManage patients identi- fied by the physician to be less complexManage all levels of complexityPhysician role in patient careManage medically complex patientsDiagnose and man- age patientsInitially screen patients Manage more complex
patientsComanage during unsta- ble periods
Collaborate with APN in plan of care


performs the intake assessment, and the physician assumes responsibility for differential diagnosis and management, or the pattern may be reversed with the physician screen- ing all patients and delegating the care of patients iden- tified as less complex to the APN. In the shared model, the APN and the physician care for an individual patient on an alternating schedule and based on patient needs. Arcongelo and colleagues (1996) identify a fourth model, the collaborative model, which involves the APN as the primary care provider (PCP) without regard for the com- plexity of the problem. fte APN and physician collabo- rate based on an “egalitarian partnership to deliver high quality disease management using APRN full abilities: a unique professional lens, expertise in team-based care and patient partnerships” (Matthews & Brown, 2013). fte communication in this model is ongoing, may transition to a comanagement arrangement during an unstable or complex period but always involves the input of the two professionals in establishing the plan of care. One out- come of this style is the ability for the APN to expand their knowledge and skills within the complex realm of patient care and to establish closer contacts with consult- ing team members while managing the complexity.
Regardless of the model of collaborative practice, the
elements of trust and a positive working relationship are vital. Collaborative relationships are a “work in prog- ress,” not facilitated by inflexible expectations or bound- aries. Over time, mutual expressions of expertise become grounded in an invisible pattern that is the glue of the successful relationship, reflective of growing skill, trust, and confidence among partners.
  
fte advantages of collaboration often begin with ne- gotiation by the involved professionals regarding which patients and conditions are best managed by the APN or the physician. ftis process may seem to be a hur- dle to competent and successful APNs; but armed with data, performance indicators (both financial and clini- cal), and the maturation of one’s practice, the process of collaborative decision making promotes effectiveness of care. For example, in the management of chronic ill- ness, APNs tend to prescribe fewer drugs, order fewer tests, choose less expensive treatments, and spend more time with patients (Fitzgerald et al., 1995). According to hospital salary surveys, the cost of an APN is often 50% or less than that of a physician. An effective collabora- tive APN/physician practice would enable physicians to spend more time with patients with more complex health needs while APNs focus on the care of more stable pa- tients as well as helping patients traverse the health-care continuum in managing their complex diseases.
In all health-care settings, it is becoming an increas-
ing challenge to provide the ongoing surveillance and case management that can support sick and frail patients to function at their highest level possible. In a study of elders, Naylor and colleagues (1994) found that acute care nurse practitioners (ACNPs) were able to reduce posthospital complications and readmissions. fte man- agement of acute illness of established patients has also shown a decrease in complications and cost while maxi- mizing the quality of life for patients. Physicians are then available to deal with those situations that require the clinical decision making and intervention of specialized



medical care. It is becoming increasingly apparent that future trends in health-care reform and public reporting will require greater collaboration and role recognition among all health-care providers as a strategy to relate ef- fectively and efficiently with all patients.
   Although barriers to collaboration persist, progress has been noted in interprofessional practice. APNs are leading interdisciplinary teams, improving primary care access, managing care of vulnerable populations, and improving patient and population outcomes (IOM, 2015). Barriers to collaboration still include the many traditions of the “Doctor-Nurse Game,” which range from sex-role stereotypes to incongruent expectations of knowledge and skill acquisition. Intertwined within these concepts are those related to cultural, social, psy- chological, and financial complexities of the health-care system. Nonetheless, when patient-focused approaches to health care are endorsed and when interprofessional education and team-based collaborative practice models are adopted, the critical aspects of collaborative rela- tionships, skills, and practices are uncovered. fte op- portunities in which patient-focused approaches fully engage among various health-care disciplines become self-evident over time. In other words, the dimensions of the physician–nurse relationship are fundamentally tied to the quality of patient care. ftis observation alone should motivate health-care systems and clinicians to encourage effective relationships between professionals to identify opportunities for working through and with one other.

CLINICAL RELATIONSHIPS

fte nature of advanced practice is such that most pa- tient care can be managed because of the skill and knowledge of the practitioner within the role. However, each practitioner acknowledges the critical significance of consultation and referral when used in a timely and effective manner. Embedded in these partnerships are the issues of relationships within the health-care team, communication styles, trust, and the ability to interact within these clinical relationships without a hierarchical framework. Although many APNs have formal consul- tative relationships within their SOP, others do not. In addition, these formal structures vary among states and

health-care institutions with a range of directives from state boards, often from different disciplines. National efforts are underway to remove SOP barriers and allow for increased reimbursement for APN services, but they have not yet been implemented (IOM, 2015). Accord- ingly, these changes can result in significant savings and increased access as well as performance improvement in patient safety and quality of care. With legislation and statute aside, the ability to work within a model of con- sultation and referral is necessary. Each member of the health-care team has knowledge and skills to offer the other, and a partnership can often effect changes in prac- tice and influence patient care outcomes that would not be possible if managed alone. Many consultative prac- tices are also influenced by the environment whereby specialty and primary care are clearly differentiated. In these situations, consultative relationships are vital to improved care processes.
Often, consultation and referral activities are con-
fused with supervision, comanagement (the working together to manage a complex case), and direct over- sight. In these situations, the accountability for prac- tice may become lost, and roles are blurred. fte limits of one’s practice expertise or the need to receive advice should be viewed as complementary, not as a defi- ciency or “take over” approach. fte professional in- teractions inherent in consultation and referral expand the APN’s ability to work with and through others while maintaining autonomy over the situation until there is a mutually identified decision that a change in care is necessary. Although comanagement and referral (the relinquishing of care temporarily or permanently) may have different themes, the goal of care is still ac- complished within a partnership mode. Hamric and Hanson (2019) state that APNs themselves are often confused about the differences. Within this framework of collaboration, the varying processes of consultation, referral, or comanagement may assume the added di- mension of a therapeutic, professional relationship acknowledging the role each member plays while sup- porting the complexities inherent in the delivery of high-quality patient care. Although knowledge, skill, and clinical expertise are all key factors in day-to-day practice, the elements of working with each other in this collaborative manner will determine and distin- guish the best practices.



INTERPROFESSIONAL TEAMING

fte need for integrated health-care teams is fueled by several factors, including patient safety; the increasing complexity of patient needs, especially among the grow- ing population of elders; expansion in the continuum of care in various health-care delivery models; the sophis- tication of telecommunications and information net- works; and changes in methods of health-care financing and reimbursement regulations. It is also evident that members of the interprofessional health-care team— physicians, APNs, registered nurses (RNs), social work- ers, and other clinicians—often practice independently of one another, rendering care as if services for the same patient or groups of patients were unrelated. ftis can create an uncoordinated, conflict-laden environment re- sulting in a diminished voice for patients and families to participate in their own care. Ineffective teamwork and communication are primary root causes in medical errors becoming the third leading cause of death in the United States. Estimates of health-care costs for medical errors are more than $17.1 billion a year with a conservative total monetary loss of up to $73.5 billion a year based on the cost of quality-adjusted life year (QALY—an eco- nomic evaluation to assess the value of money for med- ical interventions) (Andel et al., 2012; National Patient Safety Foundation [NPSF], 2015). Interprofessional teaming differs from the multidisciplinary approach to care, which has been compared with the parallel play of children with limited interactive and intersecting activ- ity. See Figure 12.3. According to Cronenwett and Dzau

(2010), interprofessional training and teaming are criti- cal to meet the needs of patients, families, communities, and populations to provide the care they want and con- trol costs in health care.
   Interdisciplinary teaming, currently referenced as interprofessional collaboration, was proposed decades ago as an alternative model of care (Pfeiffer, 1998). In contrast to the multidisciplinary model, interdisciplin- ary teaming requires that the members of the health-care team integrate their disciplines’ work and create plans of care together, centering this plan on the patient’s needs. ftis form of teamwork, interdisciplinary care, has been defined as a “special form of interactional interdepen- dence between health-care providers who merge differ- ent but complementary skills in the service of patients and in the solution of their health problems” (Tsukuda, 1990, p. 670). See Figure 12.4.
fte term complementary defines the team approach.
However, a collection of like-minded individuals does not automatically result in an interdisciplinary team. Because of the nature of this teaming, there must be a clearly defined purpose, goal, and approach to team ac- tivity, shared phraseology to ensure effective communi- cation (e.g., SBAR communication), as well as the value and understanding that mutual accountability of each team member is crucial to the team’s overall performance. fte primary purpose of this type of team is collaborative decision making for and with patients. Decision making in this model occurs in a unified timeline. Often, in a multidisciplinary team approach, a sequential timeline is experienced as a dependent process in which the final


	
Figure 12.3 Multidisciplinary Approach to Patient Care	Figure 12.4 Interprofessional Approach to Patient Care



decision is made by the “lead” member who pulls every- thing together. ftis type of decision making is limited, and potentially ineffective, when complementary activ- ity is desired.
   For the APN, the influence of interdisciplinary teams is powerful when practitioners practice at the full SOP with clear roles and responsibilities and shared values. Creative teamwork can be achieved when the entire team caring for patients can actively participate in planning, de- cision making, problem-solving, and include patients and families in their care. Changing the norms of practice, however, may be necessary. Interdisciplinary teams are the epitome of working with and through others while recog- nizing the importance of an individual’s clinical expertise. ftere are several dimensions to consider when im- plementing interdisciplinary team relationships. Articu- lated by Howe and colleagues (1998), these dimensions
are shown in Table 12.2.
   Inherent within this interdisciplinary framework, collaboration underpins the field of day-to-day practice within a team concept. Collaboration takes on the di- mension of cooperation with others, adding trust as an essential component of this interactional style because patient outcomes are consistently dependent on the ef- forts of others. As a team member, one can and should reflect on the following questions:
• Are my own goals consistent with team goals?
• Do I advocate solutions for problems that will benefit team members?
• Do I work for consensus and focus on performance
and measurable outcomes?
• Do I cooperate with other team members’ activities?
• 
Do I do an equitable share of the group workload?
• Do I feel individual responsibility for the joint out- comes of the group members?
• Do I support the team in dealing with larger organiza-
tional and regulatory issues?
• Do I view my contributions as belonging to the group—to be used or not—as the group decides?
• Do I listen to team members in a positive and respect-
ful manner?
• Do I actively participate in team meetings and assignments?
   Advocates of interdisciplinary team approaches to care realize that there are many psychosocial influences on health and disease. ftis underscores the importance of relationship-centered care and patient-centered care, which are based on interpersonal communication techniques and a collaborative care model. A paradigm shift for all members of the health-care team may be necessary because new core competencies are required and need to be role modeled for the successful transition to occur. APNs are often members of these teams and are positioned to initiate the transition to a more collaborative and patient-focused approach in their practice. APNs often assume a mediator role to in- troduce these changes in the delivery of patient care and to assist the team in its growth and development in the core competencies of interdisciplinary team approaches.
APNs may take a leadership role in influencing stages of
team development. fteir role is easily linked to the various members of the health-care team, allowing APNs the advan- tage of connecting with each discipline, clearly expressing the similarities and the differences of each member’s role and contribution. With this common ground set, the



   Table 12.2	
Dimensions of Interdisciplinary Team Relationships

Skills	Attitudes	Knowledge• Conflict resolution
• Team interaction
• Communication
• Leadership
• Outcomes-focused care
• Performance improvement•Respect for other disciplines•Roles, responsibilities, and SOP for each discipline•Respect for patient and family input•Role of the extended team•
•Respect for patient management and patient-focused care
Awareness of outcomes-based practice•
•
•Group dynamics
Application of clinical concepts and quality mea- sures among disciplines
Up-to-date knowledge of the health-care environ- ment, policy, and technology


formation and development of a team can occur within the context of four stages of team development:
• Forming
• Storming
• Norming
• Performing
   As implied by the stages, the creation and mainte- nance of teams is personnel intensive with professional adjustments required by every member of the team. Suc- cessful outcomes also imply that at least four conditions are met: the task is suitable for teamwork, the team must have the right clinical skills to perform the task, team members must combine their resources effectively, and the organization must provide a supportive context for the team (Dow et al., 2013).
   As the team works together, roles and relationships will be challenged from time to time, but the team will also move to a new level whereby extraordinary achieve- ments and improved patient care can occur. In this con- text, interprofessional teaming, with its strong emphasis on relationship-centered care, is a requisite skill for the 21st century.

PROFESSIONAL NURSING CONNECTIONS

Expanded roles for nurses span a century of growth and development from the earliest days of clinical special- ization in anesthesia, operating room, and obstetrical
  
Regardless of the common ground, however, each ad- vanced practice specialty has faced resistance from other nurses because advanced roles have often represented innovations in practice that shook the status quo of the nursing establishment and the overall health-care system. Rigid boundaries were often created and the struggle for recognition and acceptance followed. However, through organized and focused educational and political efforts, tensions lessened and improved relationships flourished. fte roles of the RN and the APN sometimes clash within the context of leadership for the delivery of patient care. Once an understanding of expertise and specializa- tion is clearly reached and communicated, the contribu- tion of each role can be recognized and a complementary approach to health care defined. Evaluative research can assist in this recognition and educational process— providing data to illustrate the effect of advanced practice nursing care on quality patient outcomes. Together, pro- fessional connections between the RN and APN can be
fortified and not diluted by professional conflict.
   fte common ground between RNs and APNs creates a powerful force in health-care delivery. fte professional bonding that exists between both groups reinforces the image of both as coleaders of care. By practicing together, the RN–APN team can design approaches to care that recognize each other’s respective strengths and expertise, resulting in a dynamic practice arena free of hierarchy.

EXEMPLARS: ENACTING ADVANCED PRACTICE ROLES

nursing. However, the knowledge and skills required in	 	
a basic nursing education lay the foundation for any

advanced practice platform. Common ground skills and competencies include patient assessment, health promotion and maintenance, health education, advo- cacy, caring, accountability, continuity, and collabo- ration with other health team members. ftis overlap and sharing of skills create a bond of practice between RNs and APNs—forming professional nursing con- nections. How do these two groups move together in partnership? Hopefully, they join together with respect for the value of each role, intending to effectively use the expertise of each professional while avoiding du- plication of effort and promoting true collaborative relationships. Such connections can broaden the scope of health care and achieve professional satisfaction for both RNs and APNs.

Using the standard set of interview questions listed in the text below, the following exemplars relate to existing APN practice settings. See Boxes 12.1 through 12.6.

Advanced Practice Nurse Interview Questions
To guide the interview process for chosen groups of APNs, the following questions were used consistently for each group with the intent of assessing roles, expecta- tions, and influences on practice.
1. How would you describe your role?
2. How would you describe your working relationship with physicians, other nurses, and other members of the health-care team?



3. What does referral mean to you?
4. What does consultation mean to you?
5. How open are members of other disciplines in tak- ing direct referrals or consultation from you?
6. What degree of authority do you experience in these situations and in your role?
7. 
Do you observe that you bring about change and a higher order of knowledge to your practice area?
8. Can you discuss a situation that may exemplify your role, especially regarding your work through other people?



box 12.1The Acute Care Nurse Practitioner (ACNP)ftis group of ACNPs, situated within an oncologythe inter-professional team in the lead position,inpatient practice, describes their role as gearedwe decide the day-to-day care for our patients,to management of each patient’s experience ofand in acute or critical episodes, we often inde-illness. fte patient’s diagnostic work-up is oftenpendently manage the process. Although criticalcompleted in the ambulatory setting before admis-incidents may be a time when the physician takession. fterefore, the patient’s in-hospital experiencea more active role, this does not necessarily trans-focuses on the management of the acute phase oflate into the need to ‘take over.’ fte goal is to workillness and treatment options as the goals of care.together—not to work around each other or with-ftey describe their perspective as multidimen-out each other.” fte ACNP is usually the leader ofsional. Using their RN background, they alwayscare because of several factors, including the closeview the patient in a holistic manner. Advancedrelationship to the patient and family members,practice clinical competencies engage their abil-the advantages of consistency of care by the ACNP,ity to case manage and guide patients and fami-and well-defined collaboration between physicianlies through the complexity of health care. In theand ACNP.changing landscape of health care, ACNPs are in-Regarding their relationships with RNs, thetegral in aiding workforce shortages. During theACNPs state: “ftere is nothing better than work-COVID-19 pandemic, ACNPs were trained to doing with a competent nurse. When this relation-point-of-care testing (i.e., ultrasound) in caring forship occurs, there is such a strong bond that youthis specialized population (Keeley et al, 2020).firmly believe that there is absolutely nothing thatWithin this framework, the ACNPs’ relationshipscan stand in the way of quality.” On the otherwith the health-care team are key because theyhand, ACNPs state that some nurses can becomespend significant amounts of time discussing med-more passive about patient care when relating toical management and locating resources, managingan ACNP. Because the RN recognizes the “nurse”symptoms, integrating feedback from other disci-in the ACNP role, the RN may relinquish aspectsplines, and identifying alternatives to the health-of their responsibility for patient management orcare system when challenged by the limitations ofassessment to the ACNP. ftis transfer rarely occursthird-party payers. Given their range of activities,within the RN–physician relationship. NPs mustthis group of ACNPs consistently relate to a varietytherefore carefully assess the nature of the ACNP–of other disciplines, primarily medicine, nursing,RN relationship to avoid jeopardizing their abilityand social work.to work through others while facilitating the ad-ftis group describes their autonomy as fol-vanced practice perspective.lows: “We feel that our common ground is theWithin the ACNP role, referrals are com-care of the patient. Working collaboratively withmonplace: ACNP to nutritionist, social worker,(continued)



box 12.1The Acute Care Nurse Practitioner (ACNP)—cont’dpharmacist, physical therapist, and  home care	clarify the patient story and often act as a facilita- services. Physicians often refer their patients to	tor of communication about patients among team ACNPs, acknowledging their specialization, ex-	members. ACNPs state their role as “performing pertise, and consistency of care. Consultations are	the editing role”—distinguishing the critical ele- more informal within the inpatient setting. When	ments of the patient story and routing the nec- acute patient situations occur, however, clinical	essary data in a more concise and relevant way to consultation is common. ACNPs state: “Not a	obtain what is necessary for their patients. As one day goes by that I am not involved in a clinical	ACNP stated, “Our role within the interdisciplin- consultation primarily focused on symptom man-	ary team is one of monitor of the communication agement, such as pain control, the side effects of	patterns and the perspective at hand. We often chemotherapy, nausea, vomiting, constipation, or	translate what is going on into a relevant, concise palliative care.” ftis type of consultation is almost	language that evokes a rapid, clear understand- always verbal for, it seems, “physicians want to	ing by those team members who need to hear the maintain control of the written consultation pro-	information.”
cess within the hospital experience.” ACNPs con-	According to this group, the design of the ACNP
sult other ACNPs as well, often involving clinical	embraces many relationships within the health- specialization expertise—usually within a verbal,	care team and consists of these major components: face-to-face framework.	1. Gatekeeper
of fte degree of authority within the discipline	2. Decoder of the complexity of the situation
  nursing is explained by ACNPs in a variety of	3. Director of care, delineating roles and responses ways. ACNPs are integral in the decision making	4. Problem solver, often suggesting alternatives about their patients and have significant influence		when barriers arise
on the nursing care being delivered. Using a spe-	5. Provider of a secure environment for staff nurses
cialization approach, ACNPs take advantage of	to ask questions and learn
opportunities to teach about clinical sequelae and	6. Guide for directing the patient care experience,
implications. One ACNP states: “I often teach at	providing the driving force behind what needs
the bedside about what is going on with the pa-	to be done, when, and why
tient, and I am watchful for the types of questions
the nurses have. ftis helps me observe the growth		Integral to these components is the ability to of the staff and assess their advancing competency.	work with others, to recognize the many roles It is really a very rewarding experience for me.”	inherent within the health-care team, to value Medical cannabis is currently a cutting-edge ther-	the team’s input and contribution, and to rec- apy that is avoided by practitioners at large due	ognize that influencing others should be always to potential for recreational misuse and lack of	focused on the unified goal of high-quality pa- clinical guidelines (Gardiner et al., 2019). How-	tient care.
ever, many RNs and NPs are becoming special-
ized in cannabis medications to help patients	Critical Thinking Questions
cope with chronic pain,  insomnia, depression,	1. What other clinical specialties could the ACNP and anxiety (American Cannabis Nurses Associa-		expand into?
tion, cannabisnurses.org). ftrough rounding with	2. In what other ways can ACNPs collaborate to staff nurses, ACNPs also have the opportunity to		advance care?


box 12.2The Clinical Nurse Specialist (CNS)fte CNSs interviewed for this exemplar describe	in working with others. fte CNSs employ several their role as multifunctional, defining their frame-	strategies to engage others in change and ultimately work of practice as more focused within a nursing	provide state-of-the-art, valid, and effective ap- model rather than medicine. CNSs categorize their	proaches to care:
role into two primary domains: clinical and pro-	1. Use benchmark data and national standards to fessional. Clinically, CNSs describe their role as in-		energize staff to change or modify practices. cluding a major teaching component and directing	2. Develop and educate staff so that they can clinical practice to facilitate and influence care of		question their patient care environment and complex  patients.  ftese  functions  are  often  inter-		relate to a higher level of performance through twined because they routinely bring about change		evidence-based practice and scholarly query. and a higher order of knowledge by role modeling,	3. Involve staff in various levels of patient care mentoring, and coaching staff to perform at “the		projects, moving forward together in change. next level.” CNSs also intervene within the health-	4. Ground all projects in the literature and best care team to make clinical recommendations to		practices so as to base decisions on evidence and
change the course of action or resolve conflicts for	promote confidence in the process.
optimal patient care. Professionally, the CNS also as-
sumes major responsibilities for the development of		fte CNS role engages an inclusive approach policies, procedures, protocols, and standards of care.	within these strategies that guarantees a successful Within this context, the education of  patients in	and lasting outcome over time.
health promotion and maintenance is key. Standards		Referrals are routine in complex cases. fte of care are holistic in nature, spanning the physical,	CNS is often the originator of referrals to other psychosocial, and spiritual needs of patients. fte	members of the health-care team but integral to needs of nurses are also critical. fte CNS encourages	bringing team members together to problem solve. the professional growth of staff, often provides ca-	Inclusiveness is again a key element of the CNSs’ reer counseling, and directs the building of expertise	practice domain and a hallmark of their effective- among nurses in a specific, individualized manner.	ness in patient care through their ability to relate
CNSs describe their role with physicians as col-	to others.
legial with a defined focus on specialty patient care		Consultation, on the other hand, is associated management, often receiving referrals for a specific	with the level of a CNS’s clinical expertise and is patient population (e.g., those with diabetes) or	often initiated by other members of the health-care an occurrence such as death or dying and bereave-	team—physicians, nurses, and social workers. As ment. CNSs are consistent in their view of the “big	an inductive thinker, the CNS has a clearly articu- picture,” focusing not just on disease and patho-	lated interest in the patient experience of care. Us- physiology but on the patient’s response to the dis-	ing these tenets of practice and change—standards, ease. With other nurses, CNSs describe their role	safety, and ethics—the CNS is able to define a plan as enablers—comrades focused on patient care.	for care, engaging caregivers to undertake the plan CNSs also provide clinical, professional, and legal	and empowering others to assume an appropriate clarification regarding issues of care to ensure a safe	trajectory for the patient.
patient environment.			As the integrator of care, the CNS exempli- When asked about autonomy, this CNS group	fies how positive interdisciplinary relationships cited self-direction and motivation as key elements		ensure positive outcomes for patients. CNSs are(continued)



box 12.2The Clinical Nurse Specialist (CNS)—cont’dteachers, clinical experts, care providers, casewithin the health-care team as critical to the suc-finders, role models, mentors, patient advocates,cess of their role.coaches, team members, policymakers, projectleaders, innovators, case managers, career coun-Critical Thinking Questionselors, and change agents. With a vision of bestHow does the role of the CNS uniquely andpractices as their foundation for care, the CNSsspecifically contribute to advance the practice ofvalue expertise and dynamic working relationshipsnursing?

box 12.3The Certified Nurse-Midwife (CNM)CNMs in a combined ambulatory and inpatientand the decision guidelines for the consultation.setting describe their advanced practice role as pri-Within this collaborative relationship, the midwifemary caregiver of women along the life cycle withis able to transition the care of the patient when aa focus on low-risk obstetrical and gynecologicalcondition warrants. ftis can be accomplished incare, health promotion, wellness, family-centereda comanaged arrangement or by a referral of thecare, risk assessment, and management of com-care responsibility to another caregiver. However,mon illnesses and acute conditions. Clinically, thisthe CNM has an expectation to be involved in thegroup views their role as centered on direct carecommunication of the plan of care and the ulti-with a strong emphasis on patient education andmate follow-up of the patient being referred. Onehealth promotion. fteir relationships with othermidwife explains that the “relationships with physi-members of the health-care team revolve aroundcians in my practice are necessary and denote manythis focus. CNMs independently care for a patientshared responsibilities. I find this relationship tocaseload, often comanaging more acute conditionsbe within an interdependent framework becausewith physicians or employing the physician aswe both need to work together to manage the pa-consultant.tient safely in given situations. I have a consultingRegarding referral, midwives in this practiceagreement with a primary physician for immedi-describe the process as formalized and often inter-ate feedback and intervention as well as with otherchangeable with consultation. ftey define many ofphysicians who are colleagues and can be employedtheir referrals as transfers to the care of a physicianfor a less acute need. But I also have the need tobecause of a specialized need of the patient overmaintain my primary care role for my patients.”time. Ongoing referrals to other disciplines are alsoWorking with the nursing staff involves interde-common, usually engaging the services of socialpendence. fte need for the RN to facilitate a planwork and home care. In these instances, the CNMof care and become integral in the assessment andmaintains the primary care responsibility for thethe education of patients is key. One CNM states,patient. With consultation, the process is also for-“I find that once my role is accepted and under-mal. Using written communication, consultationsstood, positive relationships follow, and communi-are often provided through the required practicecation about patients is facilitated. I admit that Iprotocols that identify the consulting physicianneed nurses to ultimately deliver good patient care.(continued)



box 12.3The Certified Nurse-Midwife (CNM)—cont’dI cannot do everything myself.” Nurses and otherWhen discussing their relationships with nurses,health team members who seek out the midwifeCNMs were clear that within the specialty ofas primary caregiver ultimately improve the patientwomen’s health, RNs do not abdicate componentsexperience because the model of working togetherof their roles to midwives. RNs often question anand understanding the role is achieved. One CNMapproach to care, exchange ideas to complementstates that over the past decade recognition of thecare, and practice as team members. fte specialtymidwife role has improved tremendously, especiallyof women’s health is often not characterized asbecause of updated SOP legislation and changes inillness-focused but rather as focused on healththird-party reimbursement.promotion or health maintenance framework,When asked about autonomy and authorityenabling the team approach to flourish. Respectover practice, CNMs strongly identify that their in-for the team’s contribution to the varied aspectsfluence over care processes is recognized by others.of the needs of patients enables CNMs to workfte primary reason for this influence is the publiceffectively with and through others. As one CNMrespect, acceptance, and demand for their roles andsummarized her role: “Being on the same page inservices. ftey add that this authority is strongerour plans for care is easily delineated within thisand more flexible in an ambulatory setting andadvanced practice role. ftus, collaboration is acan be less autonomous in a hospital-based birth-natural outcome. Respect is key, and once earned,ing unit, especially when associated with a medicalpaves the way to collaborative practice.”residency program. Interdisciplinary competitionin these settings can affect the perceived authorityCritical Thinking Questionand working relationships of the CNM with otherDo CNMs fully participate as equal members of theclinicians as well as patients.health-care team? Why or why not?


box 12.4The Primary Care Nurse Practitionerftis group of primary care NPs view their role asexperience but to the continuum of care. In pri-providers of a comprehensive holistic health-caremary care, the NP possesses a leadership role inexperience for their patients. With independencethe practice generally by providing a surveillanceand autonomy, the primary care NP has a three-function—a “third eye”—always watchful of thefold responsibility to assess, diagnose, and manageeffectiveness of day-to-day patient care delivery.a variety of common and chronic illnesses withinfte need to evaluate systems and clinical outcomesall the dimensions of the physical, psychosocial,is essential to the role.and financial elements of care. “My caseload offte team approach in this type of practice ispatients” is a common reference point, delineat-fundamental and involves a strong interdisciplin-ing the accountability of this group of NPs forary, participative approach to care. Patients are in-their patients over time—not limited to a hospitaldependently managed, comanaged with physicians,(continued)



box 12.4The Primary Care Nurse Practitioner—cont’dor referred within their continuum of care. fte need		role while maintaining autonomy and a knowledge to relate effectively with all members of the health-		base to provide sufficient holistic primary care to care team is constant. Multidisciplinary options		patients. Practicing side by side with physicians coexist  within  an interdisciplinary framework—		and other NPs creates opportunities for sharing creating many opportunities for  therapeutic rela-		advice or consultation. Leading patient care in this tionships among staff, patients, and family members.		practice setting is very satisfying and empowering Within the primary care practice, RNs are the	to this group of APNs. At the same time, however, “heart” of any clinical operation. fte RN com-		this sense of control and satisfaction occurs only plements the APN role, especially in the areas of		when interdisciplinary teamwork is achieved by
patient teaching, patient monitoring,  and data	doing the following: gathering. Although roles are often strongly delin-	1. Listening to others
eated, sharing clinical activity among health-care	2. Teaching others
team members is consistent and necessary.	3. Demonstrating the APN role in positive, cre-
Because of the primary care focus, referrals to	ative ways
specialists are commonplace. However, as one NP	4. Communicating openly
explained, “Losing the primary relationship with a	5. Demonstrating expertise
patient to a specialist is a concern.” fte informa-
tion and insight the specialist provides will enhance			Respect from other members of the team en- the care the patient receives from their primary care		ables the primary care NP to facilitate and lead provider. ftere are also instances when a specialist		care effectively. When sharing the same mission and primary care provider work collaboratively on		within this framework of practice, advancement of the health-care management of a patient over the		learning and change occurs. By empowering and longer term. Feedback on the means to best man-		educating staff at all levels, the barrier of the “task” age the patient is the expected outcome. One NP		is removed and has been replaced with a “connec- stated: “We expect to have our patients return to us		tion” to the patient’s illness experience. Assisting for their care and to benefit from the expertise and		staff to understand the rationale for care is a defini- evaluation by the specialist.”		tive way to initiate change and a higher level of per- Consultations, on the other hand, are frequently	formance. In addition, the primary care NP often engaged in by other caregivers. Within a mature		exhibits their own clinical specialization and exper- primary care practice, a multidisciplinary team ap-		tise, which may provide a different perspective of proach is often developed. Formal consultations		care, adding to the knowledge base of the staff. As usually occur within the practice. fte opportunity		an educator, the NP is capable of working through to have “curbside” or “hallway” consultations with		other people, engaging the staff’s interest in the these same specialists or experts exists as well. ftis		mission and work at hand. Knowledge is power,
type of consultation is often informal. fte NPs	and this power translates into effective practice.
from this practice cited the development of positive
relationships, a clear direction of the plan of care,	Critical Thinking Question
and a model of inclusivity among team members	How can the role of the primary care NP be ex- as key criteria for successful and effective consulta-	panded to interface with population health man- tions of any type.	agement and to prepare to care for baby boomers,
   Primary care NPs describe their authority as an	who will be the largest patient population in essential part of their potential for success in their	history?


box 12.5Rural Health Nurse Practitionerftis group of NPs works in isolated or underserved	d. Psychiatric services areas with patients who have limited  access to	e. Lifestyle coaching
health care. Some rural health NPs are the primary	4. Supporting caregivers to increase coping and caregiver to an entire community. Rural patients		decrease stress
have higher rates of chronic disease and have a	5. Problem-solving and innovating to generate higher utilization rate for Medicare and Medicaid		solutions and overcome challenges with creativ- compared with more populated areas. Access to		ity and resourcefulness
specialty providers is more difficult as well with the	6. Providing and receiving interprofessional learn- average patient driving between 20 and 60 miles to		ing and education
see a specialist; therefore, rural health NPs provide		fte ability of the rural health NP to manage more extensive care compared with their primary	complex cases in the home encourages patients care NP counterparts in large practices with easier	to be partners in identifying health-care issues, access to specialists.	discussing possible solutions, and developing and tr fte role of rural health NPs is to diagnose and	implementing plans of action together. “I get to
v eat health disorders, promote health and pre-	the point where I look forward to Joan calling
 ent disease, and provide health education and	me on Wednesday afternoons. You know three counseling. ftey describe their practice as “highly	o’clock comes, and I know I have to be near autonomous, relationship-based, and extremely	the phone and be ready for her call, and then I rewarding.” Interprofessional collaboration poses	give her all my numbers. She’ll check with me to challenges because of distance, outdated technol-	see if I have any pain, how the week went and so ogy, and communication barriers. Quality of care	forth, which I find is good,” explained rural vet- is improved when rural health NPs take  on the	eran Oscar Bourbeau (retrieved from http://dph. leadership and management roles in patient care,	illinois.gov/topics-services    /life-stages-populations/
support communication and follow-ups through	rural-underserved-populations).
the use of technology, and understand the rural			Rural health NPs agree that discussing risk cultures.		factors (e.g., tobacco use, nutrition, exercise, Rural health NPs cite the following requisite	medication adherence, and stress management)
competencies for their specialty practice:	encourages	health	promotion	and	involves
1. Providing home-based primary care to reduce	community-based organizations in the care of pa- the travel burden, increase the compliance of	tients. “When patients are hospitalized, we need health regimens, and improve health outcomes	to make connections, understand the goals of care, for patients	make visits when they are discharged home, and
2. Aligning patient care teams through relation-	implement an ongoing strategy for return to op- ships and technology	timal health.” fte rural health NP must develop
3. Providing telemedicine consults and digital com-	and practice at his or her full SOP to improve munication to improve access to high-quality	the health of rural populations. SOP barriers and care that includes, but is not limited to:	outdated technology that were once a hindrance
a. Acute care	in providing high-quality care are now becoming
b. Radiology	opportunities and strengths within this growing
c. Pharmacy	profession. Rural health NPs have successfully(continued)



box 12.5Rural Health Nurse Practitioner—cont’dlobbied in the years leading up to the Affordabletheir family, providing innovative and high qual-Care Act and in the years after to increase accessity care to individuals, families, communities, andto quality rural health-care services and to removepopulations, and having a lower cost of living withbarriers to NP SOP in many states to ensure thathigher pay [compared with primary care NPs inthere are a sufficient number of providers to takelarge urban practices] that all make for a very re-care of the rural and underserved populations ofwarding profession.”this country. “ftere is a great deal of satisfactionin the role, from building strong interprofessionalCritical Thinking Questionand interpersonal relationships with all membersHow will telemedicine most likely influence theof the healthcare team, including the patient androle of the rural health NP in the future?

box 12.6The Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist (CRNA)fte role of the CRNA within a hospital practice istension between the two disciplines is present withdescribed as an advanced practice specialty with aa long history of interprofessional struggle and com-strong and eventful history that has provided manypetition. With the demonstration of expertise, how-benchmarks for nurses seeking expanded roles. Asever, CRNAs have forged positive communicationan anesthesia provider, the goal of the CRNA is topatterns and developed relationships with anesthesi-provide safe and comfortable anesthesia for all typesologists centered around the patient and quality careof surgical procedures in multiple settings across thein institutional settings. Over time, CRNAs havecare continuum for patients of all ages spanning thegained professional acceptance and colleagueship.American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) clas-Within the operating room, the surgical teamsifications of “healthy” to “gravely ill/impendingassumes a vibrant interdependent structure. ftisdeath.” In discussing this broad role definition, theCRNA stated: “Teamwork is the expectation inconcept of independence is also clearly expressed,the operating room setting. fte involvement withespecially because the CRNA often is able to ad-RNs, surgeons, and surgical technologists is intenseminister anesthesia without the direct supervisionand very focused on the individual patient and theof a physician, depending on state regulations andprocedure at hand and can sometimes be describedthe requirements of the employing health-care in-as somewhat of an isolating relationship because ofstitution. For example, one CRNA stated that inthis directed focus.” fte relationship between theher practice an anesthesiologist is required to prac-CRNA and RN is described as important but less in-tice in specified ratios with the CRNA and that anfluential compared to the CRNA’s relationship withanesthesiologist must be present in the room at theother team members such as the surgeon or technol-start of general anesthesia induction.ogist. fte relationship with surgeons is described asfte clinical relationship between the CRNA andone of respect for the specialization of anesthesia andthe anesthesiologist is clearly described as one of asometimes is dependent during the course of surgerycollegial and trusting nature with open communica-because the CRNA often leads patient stabilizationtion. However, outside of the clinical arena, politicalefforts when a critical change in condition occurs.(continued)



box 12.6The Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist (CRNA)—cont’dIn the specialty of anesthesia, the CRNA usu-example, demonstrating competence, and roleally does not make referrals but is the recipient ofmodeling professional behaviors to all membersreferrals from other providers. With the exceptionof the health-care team. Using this framework,of some specialized services such as pain manage-the CRNA in one practice identifies that she isment, CRNAs do not have their own patient case-able to influence change and advance knowledgeload because the patients’ primary relationship isby relying on a clinical approach rather than anwith their surgeon. Consultations, on the otheracademic approach. In many practices, however,hand, comprise a major component of anesthesiaCRNAs also assume formal faculty roles withinpractice. Consultations reflect clinical, legal, andvarious levels of educational programs throughoutmedical aspects of the plan of care. Surgeons fre-the country.quently request a consultation from a CRNA, re-Although working through other people is an ex-specting the expertise of this specialization to assesspectation of any health-care professional role, interdis-the risks of surgery. In this endeavor, the surgeonciplinary exposure is often more limited for CRNAsis dependent on the expertise of the anesthesiaand can potentially contribute to isolation. Interdisci-specialist. Within this activity, the CRNA attainsplinary relationships are strongest within the periop-primary patient and family contact, subsequentlyerative team of the surgeon, anesthesiologist, nurse,establishing the patient-family relationship.and technologist. Extending this relationship to otherAuthority in practice is significant within the spe-clinical staff and family members is challenging. Incialty of anesthesia. “Many other disciplines do notaddition, CRNAs are often placed within a separateshare a common ground in this specialty: thus, myadministrative structure within the health-care facil-role is unique within patient care.” One CRNA com-ity or practice, contributing to the isolation, especiallyments that through her unique expertise, the inde-from other professional nurse colleagues.pendence and influence of her role take hold. “OtherWithin the context of advanced practice, themembers of the healthcare team recognize my com-goal of the CRNA is to promote nursing, advancepetence, which directly affects my sense of autonomyhealth care, and ensure a safe and high-quality pa-and authority. I am called on to assist others in theirtient care experience. As the earliest advanced prac-clinical assessment of patients, as well as the advance-tice role, CRNAs have successfully built a strongment of professional knowledge and skills of residentspresence in health care.and nurse anesthesia students. With this broad rangeof influence, my sense of authority is promoted.”Critical Thinking Questionfte ability of the CRNA to influence changeWhat role do CRNAs serve by promoting qualityand impart a higher order of knowledge in thehealth care to those who are medically underservedarenas of perioperative and perianesthesia prac-by offering obstetrical, surgical, pain management,tice is strongly affected through teaching byand trauma stabilization services?


SUMMARY

fte dynamic interplay of partnerships and the interde- pendence between APNs and other team roles in health

care is a professional opportunity. Working with and through others is the cornerstone of the successful en- gagement of the health-care team and endorses the pres- ence of APNs over time.

UNIT 
3
Competency in Advanced Practice





























219


















Evidence-Based Practice
Christine A. Tanner, Deborah C. Messecar, and Basia Delawska-Elliott



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Describe the relationship between clinical judgment and using the best evidence to make decisions.
• Describe a research-based model of clinical reasoning.
• Identify and analyze the elements of research methodology that are critical in pro- viding evidence for practice settings.
• Discuss the advantages and limitations of various types of knowledge.
• Demonstrate the ability to access information and evaluate the quality of evidence relevant to practice settings.
• Describe tools and strategies for finding the best and most appropriate evidence to
improve practice.
• Communicate search strategy to others.
• Identify forces (e.g., ethical, legal, political, cultural, logistical, and economic) that influence research methodology and interpretation of findings in clinical settings.





INTRODUCTION

Translating evidence into practice is a key skill for ad- vanced practice nurses (APNs). fte increasing inter- est in knowledge translation, the process of moving research into practice and putting knowledge into

action coincides with the growing engagement in the evidence-based practice (EBP) approach in which practi- tioners make practice decisions based on the integration of the research evidence with clinical expertise and the patient’s unique values and circumstances (Straus et al., 2019). EBP builds on the process of using knowledge
221



gleaned from systematic reviews and the results of in- dividual studies but includes much more, such as evi- dence from opinion leaders, the products of reasoning, clinical knowledge from practice experience, and patient preferences, to name a few (Melnyk, 2016; Melnyk & Fineout-Overholt, 2019). fte importance of teaching critical appraisal of evidence and knowledge translation skills has only intensified in APN programs for several reasons. First, EBP is often not the standard of care. In many cases, patients fail to receive recommended stan- dards of care or are receiving potentially harmful or un- proven treatment (Duncombe, 2018; Heelan-Fancher et al., 2019; Melnyk et al., 2018; Renolen et al., 2019). A second major impetus for the movement to EBP is the growth of scientific evidence supporting high- value health care and the development of methods for integrating the available evidence expeditiously into guidelines for practice (Fernandez-Moure, 2016). In- formation technology has also greatly augmented our ability to access this information. A third factor is that media dissemination of information has made patients increasingly savvy about different available treatments, enabling them to ask more informed questions about their illnesses and care (Amante et al., 2015). Fourth, the urgency of using evidence to improve clinical care has been highlighted by the Institute of Medicine (IOM) reports on the future of nursing (IOM, 2010) and find- ing and knowing what works in health care (IOM, 2008, 2011) as well as prior reports on quality and safety (IOM, 2001, 2004). Robust EBP skills applied with ex- pert clinical judgment can help APNs narrow the gap between research and practice and improve the quality and safety of care.
fte objective of this chapter is to present a view of
clinical judgment and the different patterns of clini- cal reasoning and their relationship to translating evi- dence into practice. fte importance of fostering clinical judgment and critical thinking in APN education was emphasized in the ground-breaking Carnegie Report (Benner, 2015; Benner et al., 2010). fte emphasis on clinical judgment in APN education is consistent with recognizing that knowledge translation should include the complex process of applying the general facts de- rived from research in a particular situation, given the patient’s circumstances and preferences (Izumi et al., 2018; Tanner,  2009). Research on clinical  judgment

is presented to illustrate how nurses use reasoning pat- terns as they assess patients, selectively attend to clinical cues, interpret these data and respond or intervene, and how evidence translation fits into this process. fte role of context, the knowledge and experience background of the nurse, and the effect of knowing the patient on these reasoning processes are also described. A classic research-based model of clinical judgment (Benner et al., 2009; Tanner, 2006) is updated and presented to provide a framework for understanding how the APN can draw on clinical decision-making skills developed over time in practice along with new skills in transforming evidence into knowledge to continuously improve the methods of care being employed. ftis model helps guide judgments about what scientific literature and guidelines are rele- vant for the questions at hand and whether the evidence that the APN has to support the assessments, interpre- tations, and actions has the utility and relevance to be applied to their clinical decision making. In addition, tips on how to access and evaluate research evidence to improve the quality of the APN’s point-of-care decisions are provided.

EVOLUTION OF EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE AND KNOWLEDGE
TRANSLATION


Historically, EBP was presented as a new paradigm in health professions practice (Tanner, 1998). ftis ap- proach, as originally conceived, devalued intuition, the use of clinical opinion based on experience, and basic scientific rationale as sufficient grounds for clinical de- cision making and instead stressed the examination of evidence solely from clinical research (Bergus & Hamm, 1995). fte aim of EBP defined in this manner is to re- duce wider variations in individual clinicians’ practices, eliminating worst practices and enhancing best practices, thereby reducing costs and improving quality. ftis goal and the assumptions underlying what counts as evidence were troubling at the time to many clinicians (Dearlove et al., 1996; Mitchell, 1999; Smith, 1996). fteir con- cern was that expert clinical judgment would be replaced by a cookbook approach to decision making. In response to this criticism, the definition of evidence-based medicine was revised to be more comprehensive in its view of what



counts as evidence and what should figure into deci- sions regarding patient care. Evidence-based medicine is the use of the best research evidence in making de- cisions about the care of individual patients. To prac- tice evidence-based medicine, clinicians must integrate their personal clinical expertise with the best available evidence from systematic research; the local context of care; and the internal evidence generated there such as patient assessment, outcomes management, and qual- ity improvement data and apply this within the context of their patients’ unique values and circumstances (Elia et al., 2018; Melnyk et al., 2014; Straus et al., 2019; Weaver, 2015).
ftis revised and updated view recognized individual
clinical expertise, which is defined as the proficiency and judgment that individual clinicians acquire through clinical experience and clinical practice as a valid source of evidence. Increased expertise not only includes more effective and efficient diagnosis but also more thoughtful identification and compassionate use of individual pa- tients’ predicaments, rights, and preferences in making clinical decisions about their care (Elia et al., 2018; Straus et al., 2019). Best available external clinical evidence was defined as clinically relevant research, which may in- clude basic sciences research but was preferentially from patient-centered clinical research that focused on the accuracy and precision of diagnostic tests (including the clinical examination), the power of prognostic markers, and the efficacy and safety of interventions. Use of ex- ternal clinical evidence should invalidate previously ac- cepted diagnostic tests and treatments and replace them with new ones that are more powerful, more accurate, more efficacious, and safer. External clinical evidence can inform but can never replace individual clinical exper- tise; this expertise allows a clinician to decide whether the external evidence applies to the individual patient at all, and if so, how it should be integrated into a clinical decision. In contrast, internal evidence is typically gener- ated through practice initiatives such as outcomes man- agement or quality improvement projects undertaken for the purpose of improving clinical care in the setting in which it is produced (Melnyk et al., 2014).
fte terms EBP and knowledge translation are related
and sometimes used interchangeably. However, knowl- edge translation is a larger, more inclusive concept than EBP and is defined as a process that includes knowledge

synthesis and the tailored dissemination of knowledge inquiry to improve health and provide more efficient and effective health services (Straus et al., 2013; Wens- ing & Grol, 2019). Knowledge translation includes all steps between the creation of new knowledge and its ap- plication. It includes evaluating practice-based evidence, facilitating EBP, and engaging in collaborative practice inquiry. fte discussion of EBP in this chapter is focused on the search for, synthesis of, and implementation of research findings in practice and how this links with use of the APN’s clinical judgment. EBP in this view includes decision making about and implementation of care practices based on several kinds of evidence such as findings from the literature, local practice data, na- tional standards or opinions of recognized experts, and information on patient preferences. APNs are expected to integrate their clinical experience with conscientious, explicit, and judicious use of research evidence to inform their clinical judgment and make decisions that maxi- mize the well-being of their patients.

Clinical Judgment and Evidence-Based Practice
What is clinical judgment? In nursing, the terms clini- cal decision making, nursing process, problem-solving, and critical thinking have been used interchangeably to refer to the same phenomenon. Clinical judgment is viewed as an essential competency in most health professions’ education, including both prelicensure and advanced practice nursing programs, and plans are underway to include questions specifically testing clinical decision making in the next-generation RN-licensure examina- tion (NCLEX) (Dickison et al., 2019, 2020; National Council of State Boards of Nursing [NCSBN], 2019). For purposes of this chapter, we define clinical judg- ment in nursing as an understanding or inference about a patient’s needs, concerns, or health problems. Clini- cal judgment also means a decision to take action, that is, the choice to use or modify a recognized approach, to initiate a new one, or to take no action, depending on the person’s response (Benner et al., 2009; Tanner, 2006). Clinical reasoning, in contrast to clinical judg- ment, includes all of the processes by which clinicians make their judgments. Clinical reasoning processes in- clude intuition such as pattern recognition, the flexible,



nuanced ability to read a clinical situation and respond quickly and appropriately. ftey include analytic pro- cesses evident in hypothetical-deductive approaches to diagnostic reasoning as well as the deliberative processes of generating alternatives, weighing them against the evidence, and choosing the most appropriate course of action. ftese analytic processes are typically referred to as cognitive processes, whereas intuition is often viewed as a holistic process (Benner et al., 2009; Tanner, 2006). Both intuitive and analytic decision making have received significantly increased attention in the health professions literature over the last decade, fueled, in part, by the best-selling book authored by behavioral econo- mist and Nobel laureate, Daniel Kahneman. fte book, Thinking Fast and Slow, draws on decades of research on decision making, exploring heuristics (shortcut rules) and cognitive biases. Kahneman’s theory divides the mind’s thinking processes into two distinct systems with each pathway characterized by its own important
attributes:
Type 1 is a fast, intuitive pattern recognition-driven method of problem-solving, which places a low cog- nitive burden on the user and allows one to make rapid and accurate decisions. Other mental activi- ties become fast and automatic through prolonged practice.
Type 2 is the mind’s slower, analytical mode where rea- son dominates. It places a higher cognitive burden on the user but allows the user to appraise data more crit- ically and to look beyond patterns and may be more suitable for more complex problems.
   A common example used to demonstrate the two sys- tems is the following puzzle: A bat and a ball together cost $1.10. fte bat costs $1 more than the ball. How much does the ball cost? Try it! Faced with this puzzle, the majority of people instantly guess 10 cents. fte correct answer, however, is 5 cents, which again, most people can work out after spending more time thinking about the question. ftis is a perfect example of how the way we think is governed by two types of mental pro- cesses: fast and intuitive versus slow and analytical.
   As applied to medical decision making, Kahneman’s model is commonly referred to as the dual processing model (Norman et al., 2017). fte two types of thinking do not operate independently but rather in tandem. It has

become a dominant model in research on diagnostic rea- soning because of its attention to diagnostic error and the cognitive biases that may lead to it; it is commonly thought that diagnostic error is more likely to result from unchecked Type 1 thinking (Lawson, 2018; Norman et al., 2017). Current opinion among psychologists is that we spend about 95% of our time in Type 1 thinking.
   fte model corresponds quite well to the two contem- porary views of clinical decision making and judgment prominent in the nursing research literature:
1. Interpretive models such as those by Benner (1982) and Benner and colleagues (2009), which have been used to explore situated clinical judgment, intu- ition, and development of expertise
2. Cognitive models (Coskerry, 2009; Elstein, 2009), which treat processes like diagnostic reasoning and treatment decision making as rational processes, exploring thinking processes through case stud- ies, simulations, and think-aloud verbal proto- cols (Forsberg et al., 2014; Hoffman et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2016)

THE CLINICAL JUDGMENT MODEL


ftrough two integrative reviews, Tanner (1998, 2006) analyzed over 200 studies, deriving a model of clinical judgment (2006). fte model describes two major cat- egories of research—interpretive and cognitive—using results of these studies to describe four major reasoning patterns: intuition, analytic reasoning, narrative reason- ing, and reflection in and on-practice. fte model has not changed substantially through subsequent research, but components have been both verified and filled out substantially. In this chapter, we review the model, high- lighting refinements to the model through subsequent research and illustrating its relationship to EBP. Some general characteristics of the research base and the result- ing model are:
1. It is based on studies that are largely conducted within both interpretive and cognitive science frameworks.
2. Most of the research base for the model was and continues to be focused on nurses in acute care set- tings. Its broad applicability to other settings or to



advanced practice nursing outside of the acute care setting has not yet been demonstrated.
3. ftree relatively recent integrative reviews of the literature (Capelletti et al., 2014; Holder, 2018; Nibbelink & Brewer, 2018) provide evidence sup- porting the conclusions and the general model but with three recommendations for subsequent work:
(1) greater focus on the effectiveness of educational applications of the model; (2) stronger evidence for the role of experience; (3) more detail on clinical reasoning in critical care during emergent situa- tions. In addition, Tanner’s clinical judgment model has been incorporated into the NCSBN clinical judgment measurement model (Dickison et al., 2019, 2020).
4. Most of the published applications of the model in the last 5 years have focused on particular aspects of the model such as intuition (Price et al., 2017); knowing the patient (Izumi et al., 2018; Zolnierek, 2013); reflection (Razieh et al., 2018); research on particular decision situations, for example, man- agement of clinically at-risk patients (Levett-Jones et al., 2010); surveillance and recognition of pa- tient deterioration (Chua et al., 2019; Lavoie et al., 2020; Pfrimmer et al., 2017; Stromme et al., 2020); or on application of the model to nursing education (Bryson, 2020; Gonzalez, 2018; Hines & Wood, 2016; Timbrell, 2017), particularly simulation

debriefing (Forneris et al., 2015; Kononowicz et al., 2019; Lavoie et al., 2015; Padden-Denmead, 2016).
5. fte model in its original form does not include an explicit link to EBP or to shared decision making with an engaged patient. fteoretical connections are explored in our discussion to follow.
   Tanner’s updated clinical judgment model is depicted in Figure 13.1. Two main components of the model are (1) the factors that influence clinical judgment on the left margin and (2) the stages (or aspects) of clinical judgment in the center of the figure. Several interactive (as opposed to linear and discrete) stages of clinical judg- ment are highlighted in the model:
Expectations. fte reasoning process begins as soon as the clinician receives information about the patient, for example, in an end-of-shift handoff (Lavoie et al., 2017), and consists of the nurse’s relationship with the patient, what they know about the particular patient, their clinical knowledge of similar patients drawn from experience, and their textbook knowledge. ftis, along with other influencing factors, sets up tacit expectations for what the clinician will encounter when they first meet the patient. For example, a nurse with experience on an orthopedic unit, learning that their 88-year-old patient is 1-day postop for a total knee replacement, will anticipate a particular level of
















Figure 13.1 Model of Clinical Judgment (Adapted from Tanner, C. A. (2006). A research-based model of clinical judgment. Journal of Nursing Education, 45(6), 204–211.)



recovery, perhaps discharge on that day, depending on the patient’s frailty. If the nurse knows the patient from a prior hospitalization, their expectations will be revised accordingly. fte nurse with a good under- standing of clinical practice guidelines for total knee replacement will also be fully aware of potential risks and complications and figure those into their plan for assessment.
Eachoftheseaspectspreparetheclinician’sexpectations— what the patient will look like, what clinical signs they might display, what symptoms they might ex- perience, what they are likely to express as their main concerns. ftese expectations are typically implicit, not verbalized, and perhaps only partially conscious, but they set up the first aspect of the clinical reason- ing process: noticing. Assessment of the patient be- gins immediately, framed by these tacit expectations. In fact, assessment is not only the first step in the nursing process, but part of every stage of the clinical reasoning process.
Noticing and Interpreting. When these expectations are
not met, when salient features stand out or when a pat- tern is recognized, “noticing” occurs; the clinician en- gages in more focused assessment related to what was noticed and in line with their evolving interpretation of the situation. As they gather data, the experienced clinician’s interpretation of their findings evolves over time. ftree different reasoning patterns are prom- inent during the interpretive phase: (1) analytic, in which each finding is compared against possible ex- planations for all findings (hypotheses); (2) intuitive, in which the clinician has an immediate grasp or un- derstanding of the situation, such as pattern recogni- tion; and (3) narrative, from listening to the patient talk about their illness experiences, how they cope, and other aspects of their day-to-day lives, often in narrative form. A clinician may rely on only one rea- soning pattern or any combination of patterns.
Responding. When the clinician is sufficiently comfort-
able with their interpretation, they respond, de- liberately choosing a course of action or intuitively responding and engaging the patient in shared deci- sion making.
Reflecting. During each stage of the process, the clinician is reflecting in their action and revising as needed. Reflection-in action occurs as the clinician is assessing

and responding to the patient. As patient responses are observed, the clinician modifies their actions to comport more closely with what the patient needs. An example is patient education, in which the nurse observes the patient’s attentiveness and reactions that imply understanding or misunderstanding then modifies their approach as necessary.
   As the situation is resolved, the clinician also reflects on their thinking and its outcomes, considering ways in which the processes could be improved. Reflection-on practice may occur spontaneously during end-of-shift report (Lavoie et al., 2020b), in storytelling with col- leagues (Wheeler et al., 2016), or in more structured approaches (Gonzalez, 2018; Lasater & Nielsen, 2009; Razieh et al., 2018). Debriefing after simulation has been viewed as an important approach to encouraging skills of reflection-on practice (Bussard, 2016; Forneris et al., 2015; Lavoie et al., 2015; Najjar et al., 2015). Current literature also supports the contention that reflection-on practice leads to clinical learning, though the evidence is still sparse (Cappelletti et al., 2014; Holder, 2018; Levett-Jones et al., 2010).

Reasoning Patterns
During each stage of clinical reasoning described pre- viously, clinicians use a variety of reasoning patterns, which can be broadly identified as intuitive or analytic (Tanner, 2006). ftis characterization aligns well with Kahneman’s “thinking fast and slow” model. fte pat- terns of reasoning used depend on the clinician’s theo- retical and evidence-based knowledge, experience with similar situations, and the extent to which their initial impression of the patient aligns with their expectations. ftese reasoning patterns, in turn, are influenced by the clinician’s values and biases, the relationship with the pa- tient, and other factors in the clinical situation.

Analytic Processes
An analytic reasoning pattern is characteristic of a begin- ner’s performance or a more experienced clinician when stumped. It can be used both in diagnostic reasoning as well as in treatment decision making. For at least two decades, treatment decision making has been promoted as a process shared between the clinician and the patient/



family, particularly in the case of chronic illness where there are multiple treatment options (Milky & ftomas, 2020). fte clinician is likely to use an analytic process to derive appropriate treatment options, considering what they understand of patient preferences and their expe- rience with the use of one or more of the treatments. In shared decision making with an engaged patient, the clinician explains the diagnosis, identifies possible ac- tions, and describes what factors need to be considered to make a good decision—what are the potential side ef- fects, what is the likelihood that these would occur, what is the likelihood of the patient’s preferred outcome?
Shared decision making between the clinician
and patient/family has been viewed as essential for patient-centered quality of care (IOM, 2001). Its suc- cess rests on a strong relationship of trust between the patient and provider with the provider engaging in one or more conversations with the patient to ascertain their priorities for treatment and the physician or nurse pro- viding information to the patient, engaging the patient in decision making, then evaluating the outcomes of the shared decision (Rennke et al., 2018; Truglio-Londrigan & Slyer, 2018). Outcomes typically include increased adherence, improved quality and safety, and patient sat- isfaction (Rennke et al., 2018). Shared decision making and patient engagement are very active areas of research evaluating the results of shared decision making, such as the use of antibiotics for acute respiratory infections (Coxeter et al., 2015) or evaluating interventions aimed at increasing use of shared decision making with inter- ventions aimed at both patients and health-care pro- viders (Legare et al., 2018). Periodically checking for updates on this topic in the Cochrane collection or other evidence-based reviews is important because this is a rap- idly expanding area of research.
Diagnostic reasoning, on the other hand, is a blended
process of both Type 1 and Type 2 thinking. It begins very early in the encounter with the client as the clini- cian attends to presenting signs, symptoms, and clinical history (cues); the clinician then generates alternative explanations for the cues (diagnostic hypotheses). To the question of where the hypotheses come from, most researchers contend that it is the result of Type 1 thinking—fast and intuitive. fte clinician then pro- ceeds to collect additional data to help rule in or rule out possible explanations, systematically evaluates each

explanation in light of the data, and arrives at one or more diagnoses or inferences about the patient’s health status, each exemplifying the slower Type 2 thinking.
   Research evidence can inform diagnostic reasoning. Research-based diagnostic guidelines, by providing cri- terial signs and symptoms as well as differential diag- noses, support the intuitive process of generating and the analytic process of testing diagnostic hypotheses. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of par- ticular disease conditions are also extremely helpful in weighing alternative courses of action. Although ana- lytic Type 2 approaches have been held up as the pre- ferred reasoning method—slow, thoughtful, rational, and therefore above error—it is not so simple (Norman et al., 2017). Kahneman’s basic research and its applica- tions in clinical medicine and nursing have uncovered a number of cognitive biases and shortcuts (heuristics) during Type 2 thinking that can result in error. Be- cause of the recent attention placed on diagnostic er- ror (IOM, 2015), Kahneman’s dual process model has become a dominant model in research on diagnostic reasoning in medicine (Croskerry et al., 2014; Norman et al., 2017).
Lawson (2018), in one of the few theoretical papers
exploring the dual process model in nursing, discusses several cognitive biases in nurse practitioners,  including:

1. Premature closure on a favored hypothesis. Lawson describes a study with internal medicine residents using case studies in which the investigators included distracting, but salient, cues. Several versions of the case were presented, some in which the distracting cues were presented early in the case and some in which it was presented later. When presented early, the distracting cue resulted in diagnostic error due to premature closure. ftey concluded that the cli- nicians clung to the early cue as confirmatory of the hypothesis and ignored subsequent data that would suggest an alternative hypothesis.
2. Availability bias causes the clinician to falsely en-
hance the probability of a diagnostic hypotheses because of the ease with which it is retrieved from memory. A recency bias can also operate here in which the clinician has had recent experience with the particular diagnosis, giving it higher probability of its accuracy.



   Despite the popularity of this model in medical rea- soning, there is little evidence that cognitive biases are the primary source of diagnostic error (Norman et al., 2017). A number of strategies to identify and reduce bi- ases have been evaluated, but the evidence is consistent that such strategies have no or very limited effective- ness. As Norman and associates conclude, “knowledge matters,” both the procedural knowledge informed by science and the clinical knowledge gained from experi- ence. Many errors in diagnostic reasoning can be linked to Type I thinking in which hypotheses are generated; if the correct hypothesis is not in the original set of three to five hypotheses, the odds of an incorrect diagnosis are very high. Norman suggests two additional strategies that may be far more effective in reducing diagnostic error: (1) deliberate reflection, particularly in complex cases and (2) making the diagnostic process a team sport (IOM, 2015) with intentional involvement of nurses (Gleason, 2019).
Intuition
Intuition was defined by Benner and Tanner (1987) as a judgment without a rationale as a function of experience and familiarity with similar situations (Benner et al., 2009). Norman and colleagues (2017) suggest that Type 1 processing can be viewed as making a direct association between new information and a similar example in one’s memory, as in pattern recognition. fte perceptual grasp that an experienced nurse gets early in their encounter with the patient may be the result of pattern recognition. Additionally, the immediate “noticing” characterizing expert practice is due to a sense of salience. As Benner and Tanner write (1987), to have a sense of salience is “to live in a meaningful world where events stand out as more important or less important, complete with nu- ances” (p. 27). As the clinician begins to interpret the full picture, they take a perspective drawn from previous experiences; they’ve learned to expect certain events and even selectively to attend to certain aspects of the situa- tion. However, the expert may have a wrong set of per- spectives, and unnoticed aspects may be crucial. At this point, they may turn to deliberative rationality to clarify their current perspective by considering how a different perspective might change the interpretation. Would new facts stand out as salient when viewed from a different set of hypotheses?
  
Several recent studies have investigated the practice of nursing surveillance, identified as a key intervention in early recognition and prevention of errors/adverse events (Pfrimmer et al., 2017). During clinical surveillance, nurses watch for changes in the patient’s condition, in- terpret those changes, and make decisions about actions to take. Surveillance is important for patient safety, par- ticularly in those settings where risk of rapid deterioration is high (Milhomme et al., 2018). fte descriptions of the process closely parallel the clinical judgment model with assessment being guided by noticed changes in condition, pattern recognition, clinical impression, and initial high- risk assessment, often through intuitive or Type 1 thinking (Gray et al., 2018; Zachariasse et al., 2017). Comparisons between nurses’ surveillance and standardized “early warn- ing” scores showed that experienced nurses had more infor- mation predicting patient deterioration than early warning scores provide (Lavoie et al., 2020a, 2020b; Romero- Brufau et al., 2019). ftis finding led one group to suggest that the degree to which nurses anticipate the eventual de- cline of the patient, or “worry factor score,” should be con- sidered the fifth vital sign (Romero-Brufau et al., 2019). Several studies identified factors contributing to positive nursing surveillance including experience, education level, and knowing the patient (Campbell et al., 2018; Chua et al., 2019; Gray et al., 2018; Pfrimmer et al., 2017).
Narrative Thinking
Evidence suggests that narratives are an important part of clinical reasoning (Bruner, 1986; Kleinman, 1988). Pa- tient narratives provide us with access to understanding the experience of health and illness. Bruner claims that human motives, intents, and meanings are understood through narrative thinking, which he contrasts with par- adigmatic thinking that conforms to the rules of logic. Paradigmatic thinking is thinking through propositional argument. Narrative thinking is thinking through telling and interpreting stories. fte difference between these two types of thinking involves how humans make sense of and explain what they see. Propositional argument is making sense of a particular situation by seeing it as an instance of a general type. Narrative thinking is trying to understand the particular case. It allows us to acknowledge individu- als’ values and personal experiences as important sources of knowledge that inform the evidence base. Kleinman (1988) has identified the importance of understanding



the narrative component of illness, claiming that patient narratives may help clinicians direct their attention not only to the biological world of disease but also to the hu- man world of meanings, values, and concerns.
  ftere is very little current research on the link be- tween narratives and clinical reasoning. However, the rise of interest in narrative medicine (Charon, 2017) and the use of narrative inquiry as a research method (Catherine-Framp et al., 2019; Nolan et al., 2018) sup- port the contention that patient narratives inform clinical reasoning. For example, patient narratives help clinicians to focus their attention not only on the patient’s disease problems but also on the meaning of that illness for the particular patient and on the effect that disease will have on the patient’s lifestyle and ways of coping. Hearing the account of an experience with an illness not only improves the understanding of the patient’s overall sit- uation, it helps identify problem-solving priorities that cannot be made explicit through disengaged analytical reasoning. Past studies of physicians (Childress, 2017; Montomery, 1991) have suggested that narrative reason- ing creates deep background understanding of the pa- tient as a person; consequently, clinicians’ judgments can be understood only against this background.
Clinical narratives are also a way of teaching and learn-
ing from other care providers and a way of reflecting on and understanding one’s own practice. Dialoguing with others who have different vantage points will produce knowledge about clinical situations that helps to limit tunnel vision and snap judgments. Using narrative as a way of communicating with other health providers leads to learning how to better identify signs and symptoms in particular patient populations, knowing specific patients and learning to recognize how these patients respond, and identifying clinical experts with whom you can con- sult (Benner et al., 2009; Childress, 2017).


FACTORS INFLUENCING CLINICAL REASONING

Nurses’ Background
Knowledge. Clinical judgment requires knowledge that is derived from science and theory and that grows with experience as scientific abstractions are filled

out in practice. ftrough basic and advanced practice nursing education, nurses develop skill in accessing, reading, and remembering relevant research evidence in the form of integrative reviews, meta-analyses, and clinical practice guidelines. ftrough experi- ence, this knowledge becomes part of an extensive, interconnected network that informs the clinician’s thinking as they enter a clinical situation. ftis kind of knowledge provides rules or principles, which can be applied in particular situations. For example, a nurse working on an orthopedic unit will have many sources of evidence-based knowledge to guide them in the care of patients after a total knee replacement. Clinicians with limited experience may lack the con- fidence to modify or individualize the guidelines for the particular situation.
Experienced clinicians have developed practical knowl-
edge or skilled know-how (Benner, 1982), acquired through working with many patients and families, through a variety of clinical situations. Adapting or revising one’s approach to care of the patient with a knee replacement is possible because of practical knowledge. Recognizing signs of complications, un- derstanding the particular patient risk factors, and knowing the typical recovery trajectory are all aspects of practical knowledge gained through experience. Practical knowledge becomes part of the intercon- nected network, easily accessed by experienced clini- cians, allowing them to intuitively recognize patterns, focus assessment, and respond appropriately, drawing from a repertoire of interventions.
Ethical comportment is the nurses’ value and disposition
toward providing excellent care. Common “goods” are evident in exemplars in nursing, for example, the intention to personalize care, the ethic for disclosure to patients and families, and the importance of com- fort in the face of extreme suffering (Benner et al., 2009). Tacit values can also have a negative effect on practice. For example, a classic study by McCar- thy (2003) found wide variation in nurses’ ability to differentiate acute confusion from dementia in hos- pitalized older adults, and that variation could be at- tributed to value differences about aging. She showed that nurses “unwittingly” adopted one of three per- spectives on health in aging: that aging is inevitably about decline, about being increasingly vulnerable,



or about maintaining health. ftese perspectives in- fluenced the decisions the nurses made and the care they provided.
Biases. At this moment, the effects of structural racism on health inequities in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic have finally arisen as priority among pro- gressive groups in the United States as well as among politicians and policymakers. In an excellent review of literature on racism and health, Williams and colleagues (2019) describe the evidence linking the primary domains of racism—structural racism, cul- tural racism, and individual-level discrimination—to mental and physical health outcomes. ftey argue that structural and cultural racism, operating through racialized social structures, is the fundamental cause of racial health inequalities (p. 109).
   However, this conclusion does not preclude the neg- ative effects of practitioner prejudice on the individual patient, in part through its impact on clinical decision making and in part through negatively influencing the development of trust in the clinician–patient relation- ship. fte role of implicit bias in health care has been extensively studied since the publication of Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care in 2003 (IOM). It includes not only racial bias, but many other biases against many other groups judged negatively by one or more characteristics, such as low SES, sexual orientation, and weight (Costa et al., 2016; Robstaad et al., 2019; Schaa et al., 2015). Implicit bias can occur in several ways: prejudice (negative atti- tudes toward a group); stereotypes (overgeneralization of positive or negative characteristics of a group), and discrimination (behavior that reveals to the patient the prejudice and negative stereotypes held by the provider through their interactions, their interest in hearing the patient’s story, and/or their engagement of the patient in health-care decision making).
fte research on implicit bias has used a standardized
measure, the implicit association test, or IAT (Maina et al., 2018), often paired with an outcome measure of decision making such as vignette-based measures. Two recent systematic reviews concluded that there are low to moderate levels of implicit racial/ethnic bias among health-care professionals (Fitzgerald & Hurst, 2017; Hall et al., 2015) and that these biases negatively affect

diagnosis and treatment decisions. In studies using vignette-based measures of decision making rather than direct observation of practice, this effect was not always evident. For example, in a study of nurses’ race and class biases, the majority of RNs displayed implicit prefer- ences toward white race and upper social class patients on the IAT, but these biases did not correlate with clini- cal decision making on vignette-based measures (Haider et al., 2015). In studies that included patient ratings of their relationship with the provider or observation of the interaction, bias was significantly related to patient– provider interactions (Hall et al., 2015), but it is more dif- ficult to demonstrate this relationship on vignette-based measurements primed by completing the IAT.

Knowing the Patient
In addition to theoretical and practical knowledge, knowledge of the particular patient, both knowing the patient’s typical responses and knowing the patient as a person, is central to good clinical judgment (Haynes et al., 2006; Tanner et al., 1993). Knowing patients is de- fined as a taken-for-granted understanding that comes from working with them, listening to their accounts of their experiences with illness, watching them closely, and understanding how they typically respond (Tanner et al., 1993). ftis tacit knowledge, which the clinician may not be able to fully describe to an outside observer, is more than what can be obtained in formal assessments. Knowing the typical pattern of responses, certain aspects of a patient’s situation stand out as salient, and other aspects of that same patient’s situation may recede in importance.
Nurses, more than most other health-care profes-
sions, have opportunities to hear patients’ stories of their illness experiences and through this to develop an under- standing of what is important to the patient, what their goals are, and how they have coped with the illness. Un- derstanding their personhood arises intuitively through commonsense understanding of storied accounts (Ben- ner & Tanner, 1987; Tanner et al., 1993). Both ways of knowing the patient form the basis for the individualized care called for by the IOM’s report (2001) on quality (Ragan & Kanter, 2017).
   In a 2014 review of the literature, Zolnierek found that knowing the patient emerged as a finding in 16



investigations with several desired effects: nurses’ ability to provide safe care, to develop positive relationships, and to engage in expert practice. Similar findings have been reported in more recent studies (Campbell et al., 2018; Chua et al., 2019; Gray et al., 2018; Pfrimmer et al., 2017). Interestingly, Nagel and associates (2017) described “Getting a Picture,” identifying ways that nurses working in a virtual environment come to know the patient. And Izumi and colleagues (2018) reported on the critical importance of knowing the patient in the nursing practice of care coordination.
   Zolnierek concluded that the process of knowing the patient occurs within the context of a relationship with the patient and in an environment that is temporal in nature. Although knowing the patient continues to be a prominent concept in the nursing literature, practice environments may not provide the conditions necessary to support the process, particularly temporal factors of time availability, sustained contact, continuity, and con- sistency (Zolnierek, 2014).

Context of Practice
Neither context nor emotions have typically been ac- counted for in most models of rational decision mak- ing. Models of decision making that ignore context, emotion, and the individual’s experience eliminate the possibility of seeing these as important in clinical judgment. However, from the work of Benner and colleagues (2009), we know that judgment occurs in the context of a particular situation. When the nurse is emotionally attuned to the situation, meaningful as- pects simply stand out as important, and the choice of responses is guided by the nurse’s interpretation of the particular situation.
For clinician providers, health care is increasingly
practiced in a context of heightened accountability (Vin- cent et al., 2015). APNs are expected to demonstrate that they can provide care that is both clinically and cost effective (Facchiano & Snyder, 2013; Vincent et al., 2015). fte struggle for the APN in this environment is to deliver high-quality cost-effective care while still in- corporating the needs and preferences of the individual patient. Values supporting patient engagement and in- volvement in decision making are socially embedded in the particular practice setting.
  
fte context for practice that influences decisions to test and treat can include the political and social milieu (Benner et al., 2009; Tanner, 2006) as well as patient fac- tors such as socioeconomic status. As discussed briefly, part of the political and social milieu for all health-care providers is widespread cultural racism. Cultural racism refers to the “instillation of the ideology of inferiority in the values, language, imagery, symbols and unstated assumptions of the larger society,” (Williams et al., 2019) and in the institutions that are part of the society. fte context for practice then becomes one where a system of racism and white supremacy can flourish and can under- gird both structural and individual-level discrimination. It can yield inconspicuous forms of racism, such as im- plicit bias, as a result of the commonplace and continu- ous negative imagery about racial and ethnic minorities. Health-care providers are not immune to this level of racism.
In their review, Williams and colleagues (2019) in-
cluded studies and systematic reviews that demonstrate the direct effect of cultural racism on the health of black, indigenous, and people of color (BIPOC). ftere is sub- stantial literature showing that self-reported discrimina- tion (the behavioral component of racism) can adversely affect health by triggering negative emotional reactions with negative physiological sequelae and changes in health behaviors, which in turn increase the risk of poor health (Ben et al., 2017; Lewis et al., 2015). Among the studies cited by Williams and associates are those that demonstrate positive associations between reports of dis- crimination and adverse cardiovascular outcomes, body mass index and incidence of obesity, hypertension, en- gagement in high-risk behaviors, alcohol use and misuse, and poor sleep. fte disparate health effects on BIPOC of the COVID-19 pandemic show, in bold relief, the long- term effects of cultural and structural racism. Perhaps the tragedies of the ongoing pandemic coupled with na- tionwide protests for racial justice will usher in the kinds of structural and cultural changes that are so desperately needed.
fte model of clinical judgment presented here pro-
vides a framework for improving the quality of clinical judgment used by nurses and APNs. First, the model illustrates where in the process of clinical reasoning knowledge obtained by external evidence can be ap- plied. Second, the model recognizes the value of clinical



expertise initially not accounted for by the original pro- ponents of EBP. ftird, because the model recognizes a broader range of contextual factors that could affect the patient’s responses, it is more inclusive in the types of research that are viewed as valid. Further, it recognizes the impact of sociocultural factors on clinical reason- ing and direct negative effects of these factors on the health of stigmatized populations. Fourth, because the model incorporates the value of knowing the patient in the clinical reasoning process, it supports a model of patient-centered care (IOM, 2001).

ACCESSING AND EVALUATING RESEARCH EVIDENCE TO IMPROVE CLINICAL
JUDGMENTS

Several problems exist with using research literature for evidence-based primary care and hospital practice (Melnyk & Fineout-Overholt, 2019; Rogers, 2019). Clinicians are under increasing pressure to keep up-to- date and to base their practice more firmly on evidence, but few feel that they have the necessary time or skills to do this or that they work in organizational cultures that support it (Melnyk & Fineout-Overholt, 2019; Melnyk et al., 2018; Melnyk et al., 2014).
   Historically, only a small fraction of the total research literature included efficacy studies of clinical practice that form the basis for evidence-based medicine, and few, if any, studies addressed appropriateness, meaningfulness, and feasibility of health-care innovations (Mathieson et al., 2019). Barriers to using research evidence cited in a recent study included the lack of usable information from this source (Melnyk et al., 2018). Such opinions have contributed to the complaint of many clinicians that the research literature has limited applicability to clinical practice (Melnyk et al., 2018; Weaver, 2015).
   In the past, most clinicians considered research liter- ature unmanageable (Greenhalgh et al., 2014; Melnyk et al., 2018; Melnyk & Fineout-Overholt, 2019; Weaver, 2015). On top of this difficulty, many clinicians do not know how to interpret the statistical results of the studies they do locate (Gagliardi et al., 2016; Melnyk et al., 2018; Weaver, 2015). If clinical research is to improve clinical care, it must be relevant, of high quality, and accessible; and clinicians must have the skills they need to use it.

To address these difficulties, APNs need to build skills sharpening their focus on the outcomes of care, forming clear and researchable questions, accessing the literature, developing strategies for maintaining currency in the re- search literature, and interpreting its relevance.
   To access the best possible evidence at the point of clinical contact, the clinician should work on the devel- opment of several competencies that support EBP.

Competencies That Support Evidence-Based Practice
Focusing on Outcomes and Context
Evidence-based medicine has been widely promoted as a means of improving clinical outcomes. To focus on outcomes in medical decision making, Sox and col- leagues (2013) suggest that clinicians use the following four-step process. First, the clinician forms an internal mental framework for the decision task, sketching out the potential treatment options and outcomes. Next, the variations among the different outcomes are estimated. In collaboration with the patient and family, the values of the potential outcomes are considered. fte course of action that, on average, will result in the best outcome is then chosen. fte scientific evidence—base rate informa- tion, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value of a positive test result, and proportion of the population positively affected by certain interventions—is the infor- mation needed for estimating the likelihood of achieving different outcomes with different courses of action.
Straus and associates (2019), in their guidebook on
the practice and teaching of evidence-based medicine, define the best research evidence as patient-centered clin- ical research into the accuracy and precision of diagnos- tic tests (including the clinical examination), prognostic markers, and the efficacy and safety of interventions. ftese elements of evidence used for predicting outcomes are defined and described in Table 13.1. Several practi- cal implications can be drawn from review of the defini- tions of the core concepts in the table. For example, to determine the predictive value of a test, clinicians need good estimates of the prevalence or probability of disease in a patient.
A limitation of this approach to best evidence is nurs-
ing’s interest in questions beyond diagnostic tests and in- terventions (Mathieson et al., 2019) to include important


   Table 13.1	
Information Needed for Estimating the Likelihood of Achieving Different Outcomes With Different Courses of Action

Core ConceptDefinitionFeaturesBase rate information: prevalenceThe proportion of persons in a given population who have a particular disease at a point or interval of timeUseful for health services planning. May be the only rates available.
Prevalence studies are particularly useful in guiding decisions about diagnosis and treatment.
Knowing that a patient has a given probability of having a disease influences the use and interpretation of diagnostic tests.Base rate information: incidenceNew cases in a specified periodUse incidence rates when (a) you are comparing the development of disease in different population groups; (b) you are attempting to determine whether a relationship exists between a possible causal factor and a disease.
Allows you to determine whether the probability of developing a disease differs in different populations or periods in relationship to specific causal factors.SensitivityProportion of people with the disease who have a positive testDetermines the ability of the test to identify correctly those who have the disease.
The more sensitive a test, the more certain you can be that a negative test rules out disease.SpecificityProportion of people without the disease who have a negative testDetermines the ability of the test to identify correctly those who do not have the disease.
The more specific a test, the more certain you can be that a positive test rules in disease.Positive predictive value of positive testsProbability of disease, given the results of a positive testSensitivity and specificity are characteristics of the test itself; however, predictive values are influenced by how common the disease is.
For diseases of low prevalence, the predictive value of a positive test goes down sharply.Absolute risk reductionDifference in adverse event rates between the control and experimental groupIs used to help determine the clinical significance of a treatment— needed to calculate NNT*.Number needed to treatNumber of patients needed to treat to prevent one additional bad outcomeCalculated by dividing 1 by the absolute risk reduction. NNT indicates clinical impact of a treatment.Confidence intervalRange of values on either sideA 99% confidence interval is interpreted as an estimate of the range of values within which one can be 99% sure that the population value lies.P valueMeasure of statistical significanceSpecifies the strength of the evidence.*NNT, number needed to treat.



issues surrounding the context of care (Weaver, 2015). Although evidence from qualitative exploratory stud- ies is not usually included in texts on evidence-based medicine, these studies are helpful for guiding advanced practice decision making. Appropriateness and meaning- fulness, according to the Joanna Briggs Institute (Jordan et al., 2016), address the psychosocial aspects of care re- lating to the patients’ experiences, their understanding of health and illness, and the outcomes they hope to achieve from their health-care encounter. ftese dimensions of care are best addressed with nonexperimental research designs, including both quantitative and qualitative methods (Mackey & Bassendowski, 2017). Change in health-care delivery environments is difficult, and evi- dence of effectiveness and appropriateness may not be enough to overcome problems that surface with change. In addition to the usual sources of high-level evidence, such as randomized controlled trials (RCTs), systematic reviews, observational studies, and interpretive studies, other avenues may yield good evidence, especially related to aspects of organizational culture that could both affect the ease of acceptance of the new practice and help de- termine how best to implement it (Jordan et al., 2016). ftese studies inform our decision making by helping us better understand patient responses. Understanding pa- tient responses is a critical condition for using reflection to engage in clinical learning.
Asking Answerable Questions
fte inability to ask a focused and precise clinical ques- tion can be a major impediment to EBP. To build skill in asking focused clinical questions, it helps to categorize questions according to their level of specificity and ac- cording to whom the question applies, the intervention being considered, and the outcomes of interest.
   Clinical questions can be categorized into needs for background and foreground knowledge (Melnyk & Fineout-Overholt, 2019; Straus et al., 2019). Back- ground knowledge is needed when our experience with a condition or problem is limited. Background questions ask who, what, for whom, why, where, when, and how well? Framing a background question is relatively easy because the question is usually asking in general about a disorder. Finding information to answer background questions is also relatively easy. Sources of information likely to provide answers to these questions include topic review

articles, practice guidelines, point-of-care tools (such as Nursing Reference Center, ClinicalKey for Nursing, DynaMed or UpToDate), factual databases, drug da- tabases or reference books, and summaries of an area or topic written by an expert in the field (Jacobs & Krainovich-Miller, 2019; Straus et al., 2019).
   As clinicians grow in experience, they have increasing numbers of questions about the foreground of managing patients. Foreground questions are prompted by a precise need for information about a specific clinical situation. ftis skill of framing foreground questions can be im- proved by breaking the question down into its compo- nent parts. ftink about the subjects or groups involved, what intervention is being used, and what the outcomes of interest are. fte four key elements of foreground ques- tions are the patient or problem, the intervention or treat- ment, the comparison intervention or treatment, and the outcome of interest (Melnyk & Fineout-Overholt, 2019; Straus et al., 2019). Foreground questions typically re- quire more information sources to adequately supply the answers. For example, questions about treatment ef- fectiveness are best addressed by evidence from an RCT design, whereas questions about patients’ feelings and perceptions about their illness experiences are better ad- dressed in studies that use a qualitative design.
Using the Clinical Literature
fte clinical literature can be used for regular surveillance or keeping up-to-date and for problem-oriented searches. To conduct searches on a regular basis, clinicians need effective searching skills and easy access to bibliographic databases. fte help of a health sciences librarian can be invaluable here. Librarians can conduct the searches or advise clinicians on the best search strategies to use. Af- ter the answerable question has been identified, use the population/problem, intervention, comparison, outcome, time (PICOT) format to help frame the literature search. fte PICOT format, shown in Box 13.1, is a particularly useful framework to help novice searchers organize their electronic database searches (Craig & Dowding, 2019; Melnyk & Fineout-Overholt, 2019; Straus et al., 2019).
ftree types of electronic databases are available. fte
first type are bibliographic databases, which index jour- nal article citations in the health sciences and permit users to search for and identify relevant clinical litera- ture. MEDLINE and the CINAHL (Cumulative Index





     PICOT Format
P Population or problem of interest I Intervention or practice of interest
C Comparison intervention or practice—usually standard of care or no comparison
O Outcome of the intervention or practice T Time frame in which outcome is expected

to Nursing and Allied Health Literature) are examples of this kind of database. fte second type of database fo- cuses on evidence summaries and takes the user directly to primary or secondary publications of the relevant clinical evidence. Examples of this second type of data- base include the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews and the American College of Physicians (ACP) Journal Club, a publication of the ACP’s American Society of Internal Medicine, which abstracts articles on diagnosis, prognosis, treatment, quality of care, and medical eco- nomics. fte ACP database has been formatted to make clinician searching for answers to clinical questions eas- ier and to help focus searches on the highest rated and most accessed articles (ACP Journal Club, 2020). ftese databases are available online from libraries and from the organizations themselves via the Internet.
Several options are available to stay current with the
literature and to organize the collected research. In da- tabases, journals, and Google Scholar, it is possible to set up regular e-mail alert notifications when new issues are released or when new articles are published on a spe- cific topic or by a selected author. Creating individual accounts is required to set up alerts. PubMed, Google Scholar, and journal accounts are free; however, access to the full text of articles may require a subscription. Sub- scription databases such as CINAHL, Ovid MEDLINE, the Cochrane Library, or Joanna Briggs Institute allow for creation of individual accounts with an institutional sub- scription. Health sciences librarians can help researchers set up seamless remote access to subscription resources.
Citation management platforms help organize the  re-
search, collect the citations, and store PDFs. Zotero and Mendeley are examples of free citation managers that offer

access to stored research folders and libraries through a variety of venues—on the Web, through a local desktop application, and on mobile devices. EndNote and Ref- Works are two subscription-based citation-management tools. EndNote offers a robust subscription-based desk- top application and a free Web version. EndNote Web, however, lacks some features found in Zotero or Mende- ley, such as easy-to-use collaboration venues. Uploading references (individual or lists) and article PDFs is easy via browser extensions or direct upload from databases. Word processor plug-ins allow researchers to automati- cally insert in-text citations and formatted bibliographies into documents in a variety of citation styles.
Appraising Evidence From Studies
After evidence has been retrieved, the next step is to eval- uate, or appraise, the evidence for its validity and clinical usefulness. Appraisal is crucial because it lets the clini- cian decide whether the retrieved research literature is reliable enough to give useful guidance. Because some published reports lack sufficient methodological rigor to be reliable enough for answering clinical questions, guidelines for evaluating literature have been developed to assist clinicians without extensive research expertise to evaluate clinical articles.
   Box 13.2 shows a typical set of critical appraisal questions for evaluating articles about therapy. ftese questions were synthesized from several sources (Center for Evidence-Based Medicine [CEBM] 2020; Guyatt et al., 1994; Straus et al., 2019). Although the questions seem to reflect common sense, they are not entirely self- explanatory. Some assistance is required to help clinicians apply them to specific articles and individual patients. fte CEBM Critical Appraisal Worksheets provide guid- ance on how to answer the appraisal questions that they specifically recommend. For example, on the question “Were research participants ‘blinded’?” the text gives the clinician a definition of the term blinding and then might provide an example that would help the clinician decide whether the studies they were evaluating met this criterion. As with any other skill, expertise and speed come with practice. fte evidence does not automatically dictate patient care, but it does provide the factual basis on which decisions can be made.
As APNs begin to build their critical appraisal skills
of literature, several Web sites can be accessed to further





     Appraising Therapy Articles
Critical appraisal questions used to evaluate a therapy article:
• Is the study valid?
• Was there a clearly defined research question?
• Was the assignment of patients to treatments randomized, and was the randomization list concealed?
• Were all patients accounted for at the study’s conclusion?
• Was there an “intention-to-treat” analysis?
• Were research participants “blinded”?
• Were the groups treated equally throughout?
• Did randomization produce comparable groups at the start of the trial?
• Are the results important?
• How large is the treatment effect?
• How precise is the finding from the trial?
refine these skills. fte library guide Evidence-Based Practice  (EPB) Toolkit (https://libguides.ohsu.edu
/ebptoolkit) at Oregon Health & Sciences Univer- sity provides Help sections that contain numerous resources for finding, evaluating, and rating the lit- erature. ftere is also a Resources for EPB guide at McMaster  University (https://hslmcmaster.libguides
.com/c.php?g=306765&p=2044668) that is very helpful. In addition to this site, the CEBM has the CATmaker  critical appraisal tool (https://www.cebm
.net/2014/06/catmaker-ebm-calculators), which can be downloaded to help the APN create Critically Ap- praised Topics (CATs) for key articles about therapy, diagnosis, prognosis, etiology/harm, and systematic reviews of therapy.

Sources of Primary Clinical and Research Literature
MEDLINE, created and maintained by the National Li- brary of Medicine (NLM) in Bethesda, Maryland, is the most comprehensive bibliographic database of indexed literature in the health sciences. NLM provides access to

MEDLINE through its free platform, PubMed (http:// pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). MEDLINE is searchable by medical subject headings (MeSH) and subheadings as well as by author, journal, title, and keyword. fte journals cov- ered by MEDLINE are noted for their overall reliability and quality; however, individual articles still must be care- fully appraised for their validity and quality as evidence.
  CINAHL stands for Cumulative Index of Nursing and Allied Health Literature. It contains literature in nursing; biomedicine; physical and occupational therapy; and other allied health fields as well as nursing disserta- tions, select conference proceedings, and evidence-based care sheets. CINAHL is searchable by CINAHL subject headings, keywords, authors, titles, and journal titles.
   Both databases offer expanded features with personal accounts that are free to everyone in PubMed and free with library subscription in CINAHL. fte additional features include the ability to save searches and article collections as well as automated e-mail topic alerts. Topic alerts are an excellent way of staying abreast of current literature. Another option for staying current is to set up table of contents alerts in specific journals.
   Other databases such as Scopus, SocIndex, and PsycInfo may be consulted for searches requiring re- sources beyond the biomedical literature.

Appraising Summaries
Meta-analysis uses statistical techniques to combine results across studies. Integrative reviews rely on sum- maries, logical synthesis, and narrative to characterize findings. Research-based guidelines center on care of a particular patient population and specify processes of care associated with good outcomes. ECRI Guidelines Trust and the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force sites provide access to treatment and screening guidelines. Subscription point-of-care tools such as DynaMed, UpToDate, ClinicalKey, and BMJ Best Practice have evidence-based summaries on many clinical topics.
Meta-Analysis
Meta-analysis requires enough studies with sufficient commonality to provide a valid conclusion. In other words, studies have to be looking more or less at the same outcome and the same intervention. Meta-analysis is often used when several studies have been conducted but findings were inconclusive. Meta-analyses combine



the statistical results from several studies into one statis- tic that can be used to gauge the size of the treatment’s impact on the outcome of interest. To do this, first an effect size is calculated for each finding of interest in the studies being reviewed. ften a pooled effect size is calcu- lated for all findings together.
   ftere is controversy about the statistical techniques and assumptions of meta-analysis. Bias in the com- bined analysis is possible if the selection of studies was flawed or the elimination of methodologically poor studies was not done using an objective process. ftere are also inherent problems with data pooling, especially if the studies are not similar enough in design, sam- ple size, outcome types, and forms of the independent variables used. fte quality of a meta-analysis can be assessed using the AMSTAR 2 tool (Shea et al., 2017). Once you have examined the major components of the review, you can make a judgment about whether you think it is a high-quality review and whether the find- ings are valid.
Integrative Research Review
Integrative research reviews do not use statistical tech- niques to summarize results across studies. Rather, they rely on the logical comparison and synthesis of the re- viewer. fte integrative research review method is the re- search synthesis approach used by most review articles in clinical care journals. fte quality of these reviews and their resulting conclusions are even more dependent on the reviewer’s skill in critical appraisal. High-quality re- views make explicit how studies were selected for review and the rules that were used to judge the overall evidence. fte reviewer should state whether some studies were weighted more heavily than others and should provide a rationale for doing so. If some studies were discounted, this also should be described. At present, integrative re- search review is the only mechanism available for looking at qualitative studies that address the same topic.
Practice Guidelines
Practice guidelines can include formal clinical protocols put forth by a professional organization, clinical paths formed by a practice group, and research-based recom- mendations that translate conclusions of a meta-analysis or an integrative research review into clinical practice conclusions. A practice guideline should clearly state what the guideline does and does not cover, for what

patient group it was designed, the options at each deci- sion point, the actions recommended, and the outcomes associated with each course of action. ftere should be a clear description of the supporting evidence and how it was gathered and evaluated. Because the literature is always evolving, practice guidelines should be explicit about how current they are. fte comprehensiveness of the guideline should also be described. ECRI Guidelines Trust, a Web site aggregating current guidelines, offers a TRUST Scorecard. A tool developed by the Appraisal of Guidelines, Research and Evaluation (AGREE) research team assesses the methodological quality of practice guidelines (Brouwers et al., 2016).
Locating Sources of Summaries
fte Ovid Evidence-Based Medicine Reviews (EBMR) contains a number of resources, including the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews and the ACP Journal Club, linking to full-text articles in journals as well as full-text topic overviews published in the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, which is published by the Cochrane Collaboration. Links between the Ovid databases and EBMR allow users to link from a citation to a review to the full text of that reviewed article and then to other readings referenced in the article.
  fte Agency for Healthcare Research and Qual- ity (AHRQ) provides evidence-based information on health-care outcomes; quality; and cost, use, and access. In examining what works and what does not work in health care, AHRQ’s mission includes both translating research findings into better patient care and providing policymakers and other health-care leaders with infor- mation needed to make critical health-care decisions. Reports compiled by EBP centers are available on a range of topics and can cover several therapies for a given condition. By using your browser’s “Find” feature, you can quickly locate a given topic. fte ECRI Guidelines Trust, U.S. Preventive Services Taskforce, and health- care organizations’ professional society pages are sources of evidence-based practice guidelines.
fte Cochrane Collaboration produces a structured
database of high-quality systematic reviews of RCTs. Originally established in Britain, it is presently composed of numerous centers in several countries. Reviews involve exhaustive searches for all RCTs, both published and un- published, on a particular topic. One limitation of the database is that the reviews focus mainly on therapies,



although an increasing number of reviews on diagnos- tic topics are being developed. fte studies are analyzed using standardized methodology and meta-analysis. fte Cochrane Library, now managed by Wiley, contains high-quality, independent evidence to inform health- care decision making. It includes reliable evidence from Cochrane and other systematic reviews, clinical trials, and more. Cochrane reviews bring you the combined results of the world’s best medical research studies and are recognized as the gold standard in evidence-based health care.
   Nursing-specific resources for evidence reviews have also been developed. fte Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI; at www.joannabriggs.org), based in Australia, is committed to evidence translation and use worldwide. fte JBI pro- duces evidence summaries and provides guidelines on evidence application to practice. fte JBI Evidence Syn- thesis (formerly JBI Database of Systematic Reviews and Implementation Reports is a publication aggregating the Institute’s latest research.
   fte Online Journal of Knowledge Synthesis for Nursing is a peer-reviewed online journal dedicated to the sci- entific advancement of EBP in health care. fte journal presents current scientific evidence to inform clinical decisions and ongoing discussions on issues, methods, clinical practice, and teaching strategies for EBP. Each article is written as a synthesis of research studies on a single topic and concludes with practice implications.

Clinical Significance and Appraisal Process
Having identified evidence that is both valid and rele- vant, the next step in using the evidence is to make a judgment about applying the evidence with your patient in your setting. Box 13.3 provides a list of questions that clinicians can use to make a judgment about the clinical application of the research findings. You must determine whether your patient is sufficiently similar to the study participants for the results to be applicable. Critical fac- tors that can affect generalizability include demographics such as race, age, and gender. Other factors to consider relate to the feasibility of implementing the proposed in- tervention, diagnostic test, and so on. Once the clinician has weighed the clinical use of the evidence and deter- mined that implementation is feasible or desirable, they can either implement it directly in a patient’s care or use it to develop protocols and guidelines.



Clinical Significance Appraisal Process:
     Questions to Guide Thinking
To determine the applicability of evidence to practice, answer the following questions:
• Were the subjects similar to patients for whom you might provide care now or in the future?
• Could you base an intervention on the findings
of this external evidence?
• Would any intervention you might identify be within your scope of practice?
• What does the body of evidence say about the
general question that motivated the inquiry?
• What actions does the body of evidence warrant?
SUMMARY


ftis chapter should not be considered a stand-alone re- source for learning the principles of EBP. It is almost im- possible to learn how to search the literature effectively and appraise it efficiently without the help of others and without good resources. Working in groups is the best method to master these skills. Ask a librarian to conduct the search for you or teach you how to do it yourself. Share the task of searching and appraising with others. Develop a system for storing work and sharing it with others. Electronic information storage and retrieval systems are evolving rapidly, so continued updates in the available technology are necessary. When evidence is used to inform clinical judgment, the APN can take advantage of new knowledge developments so that care can be more individualized, effective, streamlined, and dynamic.
















Advocacy and the Advanced Practice Nurse
Andrea Brassard



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Describe the need for nurses to prepare for the role of patient advocate.
• Promote the autonomy of the patient in being the decision maker about their care and in taking responsibility for self-care.
• Identify skills needed to advocate for consumers, families, and public-policy
change.
• Present health and wellness coaching as a model of advocacy.
• Describe research evidence on the role of the advanced practice nurse (APN) in advocacy.
• Identify examples of APN advocacy.
• Locate Web-based resources for APN advocacy.




INTRODUCTION

Now more than ever it is essential for nurses to be pre- pared as patient advocates. fte U.S. health-care deliv- ery system is a complicated maze of services with many gates and gatekeepers. Not surprisingly, consumers often need help navigating their way through this intimidating

maze. fte advanced practice nurse (APN) is well posi- tioned to advocate for individual consumers and families who confront barriers to getting the health-care services they need. APNs can also advocate for systemic changes to remove the barriers. It takes education, sophistica- tion, and determination to advocate at both of these levels. ftis chapter provides the context for advocacy

239



and advocacy education. Advocacy and health coaching are described and examples of individual, family, and consumer-driven systems-level advocacy are provided. Finally, nurse advocates in each of the four APN roles are highlighted along with Web-based resources for APN advocacy.

CONTEXT FOR ADVOCACY

Nursing leaders Florence Nightingale, Sojourner Truth, Lillian Wald, and Margaret Sanger are testaments to the nursing profession’s historic roots in championing im- proved health care, especially for the most vulnerable among us (Mason et al., 2021). ftese pioneers advanced human rights, compassionate care, and lasting societal changes.
   fte word advocacy is derived from the Latin advoca- tus, which means “one who summons to give evidence” (Gates, 1995). Advocate is both a verb and a noun—to act for, speak for, plead for, or defend; one who acts for, speaks for, pleads for, or defends. Advocacy has been de- scribed as informing, advising, or counseling (Gadow, 1980, 1989; Mitchell & Bournes, 2000).
  fte American Nurses Association (ANA) Guide to the Code of Ethics for Nurses defines advocacy as “the act or process of pleading for, supporting, or recommend- ing a cause or course of action. Advocacy may be for persons . . . or for an issue” (ANA, 2015, p. 37). fte ANA Code of Ethics calls on nurses to promote, advocate for, and protect patients’ rights, health, and safety. Advo- cacy is based in the fundamental principles of respect for human dignity, the right to self-determination, and pri- macy of the patient’s interests (ANA, 2015). All nurses need to be prepared for the role of patient advocate.
   Nurse leaders, researchers, and educators have de- scribed philosophical foundations for advocacy (Curtain, 1979), qualities of an advocate (Gazarian et al., 2016), and curricula for preparing advocates (Jones, 1982). Advocacy for self, patients, and policy is highly desirable, an indicator of excellence in practice, and a domain in advanced practice nursing (Benner, 1984; Gadow, 1980; Millette, 1993). Nurses occupy a middle ground between the consumer and the health-care system, an optimal place to mediate (Bishop & Scudder, 1990; Stein et al., 1990).
  
Historically, advocacy has been linked to the potential powerlessness of a patient, although the rising power of the consumer affects our definitions of advocacy (Hewitt, 2002). Advocacy must be distinguished from both pater- nalism and consumerism (Schroeder & Gadow, 2000). Paternalism is the commitment to making decisions for the client because the professional is obligated to impose expertise on behalf of the person in need. Professionals often presume that a person in need is incapable of ratio- nal judgment. In contrast, consumerism is the commit- ment to remain uninvolved in client decisions. Persons in need are presumed to be capable of rational judgment, and their right to self-determination must be respected (Schroeder & Gadow, 2000). Box 14.1 lists important concepts to consider to ensure the autonomy of the pa- tient in being the decision maker about their care and their responsibility for self-care.

ADVOCACY AND COACHING


A newer model of patient advocacy is health and well- ness coaching. Eileen O’Grady, advanced practical registered nurse (APRN) and wellness coach, empow- ers clients to take an active role in their own health (Gardner, 2014). Coaching involves teaching clients to advocate for themselves for self-care within the com- plicated health-care system. It is a natural extension of nursing practice (Hess et al., 2013). Health coaching goes beyond patient education; coaches empower cli- ents to set and keep wellness goals (Swarbrick et al., 2011). Health coaches acknowledge clients as experts in their own care (Hess et al., 2013). Health coaches and advocates recognize what an individual is striving



Concepts Related to Patient Autonomy and Advocacy• Person-centered care
• Family involvement
• Informed consent
• “Right to try”
• Right to refuse treatment and services


for, identify goals and values, and respect the person’s choices (ftrasher, 2002). Health coaches value the au- tonomy of the individual in being the decision maker about their care and their responsibility for self-care. Health coaches increase the options that are available to clients in order to allow them to exercise control over their lives. Health coaches are often care coordinators who use their advocacy skills to help clients negotiate the complex health-care system.

LEVELS OF ADVOCACY

Definitions of advocacy focus on the individual and family or public policy, suggesting two levels of advocacy for APNs. Client-focused definitions of advocacy em- phasize enhancing client autonomy and assisting clients in voicing their values (Connolly, 1999). At the individ- ual and family client level, the APN uses a set of skills to help people identify their needs and obtain services and provides coaching to meet those needs. Public-policy focused advocacy aims to influence legislators and pol- icymakers to change laws or policies with the ultimate goal of improving public health (Taylor, 2016). At the public-policy level of advocacy, the APN uses many of the same skills needed at the individual/family level— and some new ones—to advocate for changes in the health-care delivery system itself.

Advocacy at the Individual and Family Levels
fte client-focused definition of advocacy speaks to pa- tient advocacy, which focuses on individual patients and their families. fte dominant model for patient advocacy comes from the counseling paradigm. During the civil rights and women’s movements of the 1960s and 1970s, nurses were moving past previous modes of subservience to physicians and institutions to a direct relationship with the patient. Inherent in that relationship is the rec- ognition that the nurse has the authority that comes with a scientific body of knowledge that is not fully accessible to the layperson (Abbot, 1988). fte nurse’s ethical re- sponsibility is to transfer as much of that knowledge as possible to the patient and support the patient in making informed choices. Patient advocacy becomes teaching,

nonjudgmental support of the person’s choices, and as- sistance in acting on those choices (Hanks, 2010).
  fte counseling model is the mainstay of advanced practice nursing at the individual and family levels. fte more contemporary “consumer empowerment” model reminds us that most people do not want or need continual counseling by professionals. Consumers are breaking away from the medical-model orientation that assumes that health professionals know what is best to “protect” patients. Nurses who define advocacy primar- ily as protecting patients (Foley et al., 2002) may have difficulty with the contemporary principles of consumer self-advocacy. Consumers do not seek paternalistic pro- tection. Rather, they seek professionals who can help them navigate the system, a high priority for consumers and families who define advocacy as “a go-between who knows the system and will advise you” (Connolly, 1999, p. 390).
fte skills and competencies needed by APN
patient advocates include empathetic listening, self- confidence, assertiveness, negotiation, collaboration, communication, physical assessment, mental-status assessment, crisis intervention, case management, change agency, and teaching (Connolly, 1999). Clearly all these skills are within the scope and education of APNs. However, paramount to the success of the pa- tient advocate is a philosophical foundation that in- dividuals, particularly those who are vulnerable and suffer from any disease or impairment, are unique hu- man beings who deserve and require respect, dignity, and the right to make decisions concerning their lives. Advocacy for patients and families is a fundamental part of the nursing process.
Advocacy Exemplar: Individual and Family Level
ftere are many ways that APNs can advocate at the in- dividual and family level. fte personal story that follows provides one example.
   fte COVID-19 pandemic changed how patients’ family caregivers interact with the health-care system. Family members and friends were not allowed to visit their loved ones in hospitals or long-term care (LTC) settings. Research on the effects of this forced isolation is forthcoming. fte following personal story illustrates how advocacy was needed to make an exception to the no-visitors policy.



Personal Story
fte author’s husband was in excellent health until April 2020. A church pastor, James had
transitioned his church to online services during the pandemic. James was in the process of videotaping the upcoming Palm Sunday service when he became unable to read the text on the screen. fte videographer asked “What do you mean, you can’t read?” James replied that the words on the screen made no sense and that he was also unable to read his printed sermon.
  fte author contacted James’s primary care provider, who sent him to the emergency department. Imaging tests revealed a large tumor in his left parietal-occipital lobe. James had a craniotomy 2 days later followed by a 48-hour stay in the postanesthesia care unit. He was transferred to the neurosurgery unit late in the day. He had an uneventful night, but the following day his assigned nurse called the author to say that James was very agitated. fte nurse said that she played
Christian music for him, and the hospitalist ordered a palliative care consult. fte author spoke to the hospitalist and said that typically hospitals would provide a “sitter.” fte author said “I’m an NP. Please allow me to visit.” After more discussion, the author was allowed to visit for 2 hours. fte author provided personal care, helped the care technician get James out of bed to the toilet, and encouraged James to eat supper sitting in a chair. James said that hearing the Christian music made him think that he was waiting to die. At the end of 2 hours, the author called the attending physician who agreed to discharge James to home.
Discussion
Hospitals’ no-visitors policy is said to be the cruelest disruption of life because of the COVID-19 pandemic (Hafner, 2020). Research has shown
that patient outcomes such as decreased length of stay improve with open and flexible visiting hours (Trogen, 2018). fte impact of keeping visitors out of hospitals during the COVID-19 pandemic is not yet known. Family caregivers would say that they are not just visitors; instead, they are valued members

of the health-care team. Family caregivers provide emotional support, care coordination, assistance with personal care, and perform medical-nursing tasks for older adults with chronic and serious illness (Reinhard et al., 2019). Older adults in LTC settings have been hardest hit by the COVID-19 pandemic. Losing in-person family support can be devastating for these assisted living and nursing facility residents (Hado & Feinberg, 2020).

Systems-Level Advocacy
Systems-level advocacy is nursing practice at the popu- lation or community level. Public health nurses think of it as “upstream thinking.” For example, an APN can treat a child with asthma and help the child’s family nav- igate through emergency department visits and clinic follow-up visits. However, a more upstream advocacy approach would be to prevent asthma exacerbations through programs for abating all household environ- mental asthma triggers. Consumers need both levels of advocacy, and APNs can be engaged in both levels with different intensity. Although not all APNs desire a policy-level advocacy role, they can all support policies and programs that their nursing colleagues are advancing on behalf of consumers.
fte advocacy skills that APNs need to successfully
advocate for individuals and families are foundational for systems-level advocacy. Advocacy at this level usually involves developing new policies, programs, or regula- tions, or at least changing the old way of doing things enough to make a difference for the people that nurses serve. Communication skills are crucial. Active listening skills are as important as verbal skills; indeed, more in- sight is gained from listening than from speaking. Insight into the problem leads to more creative problem-solving and ideas for negotiating system solutions. Negotiation is more complex at the systems level than at the individual and family levels because generally there are more stake- holders involved when advocating policies and programs. fte APN needs to be assertive enough to overcome re- sistance to change and collaborative enough to create or join with others who can help advance the advocacy goal.
To be most effective at the systems level, APNs need
to understand program and policy development. ftis requires an understanding of the change process in



general with skill development in creating and sustain- ing a vision for change, anticipating and dealing with resistance to change, developing a broad base of support, and understanding the art of compromise (Brassard, 2021). Systems-level advocacy requires determination and persistence.
   Few APNs will choose to lead this kind of systems advocacy. But many will choose to support or resist it. At a minimum, APNs need to understand systems advo- cacy. Systems advocacy involves citizenship and a call for participation in the decisions that affect our lives and the lives of those we serve (Joel, 1998; Paquin, 2011).
Consumer-Driven Systems-Level Advocacy
Nurses can lead systems advocacy efforts both as profes- sionals and as consumers. One case example comes from AARP (formerly the American Association of Retired Persons). ftis exemplar is driven by nurses and nurse advocates working in a consumer organization and illus- trates several of the themes in the literature on advocacy, including the following:
• Advocacy is an activity that is not owned by one sector of health care.
• fte consumer is an expert.
• Advocacy is a partnership between consumers and professionals.
• Advocacy calls for the development of creative
strategies.

Advocacy Exemplar: CARE Act
Most family caregivers perform complex medical/nursing tasks with very little guidance according to a ground- breaking study by the AARP Public Policy Institute and the United Hospital Fund entitled Home Alone: Family Caregivers Providing Complex Chronic Care (Reinhard et al., 2012) and the follow-up report Home Alone Revis- ited: Family Caregivers Providing Complex Care (Reinhard et al., 2019). AARP surveyed family caregivers across the country to determine the type of help they were pro- viding and found that they were providing much more complex care than many had thought:
• Half were performing some kind of medical/nursing tasks or medication management.
• Most did not get any training to perform these tasks.
• 
Most care recipients did not have home visits by a health-care professional.
• About half of caregivers who perform medical/nursing
tasks are worried about making a mistake. fte more complex the task, the greater the worry (Reinhard et al., 2019).

   Family caregivers reported receiving little formal train- ing in medical/nursing tasks such as managing medications, performing wound care, or operating medical equipment despite patients’ frequent hospitalizations. When nurses in selected hospitals, nursing homes, and home care agencies were surveyed about how well they trained family caregiv- ers, most were very positive that they had done a good job. Family caregivers of patients who had been discharged from the same settings did not agree (Levine et al., 2013). “Staff may have indeed given family caregivers . . . information, but not in a way that those family caregivers understood and could use” (Levine et al., 2013, p. 20).
In response to the Home Alone report, AARP devel-
oped model legislation to help family caregivers get the recognition, information, and instruction they needed to perform the complex medical/nursing tasks that they were often expected to perform. fte Caregiver Advise, Record, Enable (CARE) Act required hospitals to ask pa- tients to designate a caregiver, to notify the caregiver be- fore discharge, and to educate the caregiver in medical/ nursing tasks they will be expected to perform (AARP, 2015). Educating caregivers on medical/nursing tasks included providing training and the opportunity for re- turn demonstration of procedures.
   Implementing the CARE Act in hospital settings has been uneven. Although hospitals may identify the fam- ily caregivers on admission paperwork, especially if they are the next of kin, other aspects of the CARE Act such as timely notification of discharge are more difficult to enforce. Educating caregivers on medical/nursing tasks may only consist of “telling.” Many hospitals do not al- low anyone other than a hospital employee to perform medical/nursing tasks on a hospital patient, so there is no opportunity for return demonstrations. APNs in hos- pital settings have needed to advocate for institutional policy changes to allow caregivers to perform procedures such as insulin administration or tracheostomy suction- ing to their hospitalized loved one (personal communi- cation, Sincere McMillan, June 7, 2016).







ADVOCACY TO REMOVE BARRIERS TO APN PRACTICE AND CARE

Chapter 6, “Advanced Practice Nurses and Prescriptive Authority,” describes statutory and regulatory barriers to APN practice and care (Towers, 2021). Recall from Chapter 6 that the first recommendation of the land- mark 2011 Institute of Medicine (IOM) report The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health is to remove scope of practice barriers to enable APNs to practice to the full extent of their education and training (IOM, 2010). Since the report was released, significant progress has been made in removing state and federal barriers to APN practice and care.
   One initiative, the Campaign for Action, is coordi- nated through the Center to Champion Nursing in America, an initiative of the AARP Foundation, AARP, and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF). AARP leads the Campaign’s advocacy efforts. Several years ago, AARP endorsed the major recommenda- tions of The Future of Nursing report and changed its policy book to recommend that states should “amend current . . . licensing laws to allow APNs to perform duties for which they have been educated and certi- fied” (AARP, 2016). fte Campaign for Action Web site details progress that has been made in removing state and federal barriers to APN practice and care through the efforts of APNs, AARP state offices, and other advocates.

HOW NURSES LEARN ADVOCACY


Whether advocating for individuals and families or ad- vocating for system changes that will support them bet- ter, APNs need to develop advocacy skills. Developing these skills takes practice. fte expert nurse learns the advocacy role through regular dialogue with other mem- bers of the nursing community, the patient, the patient’s family, and other clinicians (Benner, 1991). New APNs need nurturing and administrative support to take on this role (Foley et al., 2002).
   Fundamental to nursing is the understanding of each individual as a unique human being and of the needs created by their illness or condition. ftis knowledge is acquired through the nurse–patient relationship and therefore is distinctly nursing knowledge. Recognition that it is the individual, not the professional, who ulti- mately makes their own health-care decisions calls for providers to synthesize this knowledge and understand that “freedom, respect and integrity are essential to our full development as a person” (Foley et al., 2002, p. 3).
   Application of this philosophy may be more deeply rooted in a value system than in a learning process (Foley et al., 2002). In their study, Foley and colleagues found that advocating for others was a natural and important aspect of practice rather than a learned process. fte value of advocacy stems from family and community experience and is inte- gral to nurses’ being as persons. Although the value of advo- cacy cannot be taught, faculty “may need to define advocacy in relationship to patient care” (Foley et al., 2002, p. 185).
   Nurses can learn how to advocate by watching other nurses interact with patients and providers and by work- ing with mentors (Foley et al., 2002). Role modeling and dialogue provide opportunities for positive learning experi- ences. Expert APNs are positioned to provide examples and communication strategies necessary for developing advo- cacy. ftroughout the process of role modeling and mentor- ing, validation and a supportive environment are necessary if nurses are to gain the confidence required to advocate for pa- tients (Foley et al., 2002). New APNs require corroboration that their practice and judgment are correct. Experienced APN preceptors who recognize the risk taken by new APNs in revealing their knowledge deficits create positive learning experiences and support a foundation for the development of advocacy practice. One-to-one mentoring can help new APNs consciously learn how to advocate (Foley et al., 2002). See Table 14.1: Building Patient-Advocacy Skills.


   TaBle 14.1	
Building Patient-Advocacy Skills

SkillWays to DevelopEmpathetic listening• Acknowledge the patient’s verbal and nonverbal communication.
• Ask open questions.
• Clarify, restate, validate.
(Adapted from Pehrson et al., 2016, Table 1)Self-confidence• Work with mentors in a supportive environment.
• Speak up and ask questions. (Foley et al., 2002)Assertiveness• Observe preceptors and experienced APNs advocating for patients.
• Role-play expressing concern with “I” statements.Negotiation• Know your own biases, values, and goals.
• Value and manage diversity.
• Use your own power to create win-win situations. (Gardner, 2005)Collaboration• Develop constructive conflict resolution skills.
• Be present both physically and mentally in team forums. (Gardner, 2005)Communication• Practice active listening.
• Consider how you make treatment suggestions.
• Show respect—be helpful and caring, not pushy and coercive. (Connolly, 1999)Physical Assessment• Consider undiagnosed health-care problems.
• Consider comorbidities. (Connolly, 1999)Mental status assessment• Observe preceptors and interprofessional team member to determine patient competency to make treatment decisions.
(Connolly, 1999)Teaching• Teach patients and families:
• Nature and course of illness
• Medications and medication management
• Effective treatments
• Symptom identification, reporting, and management
(Connolly, 1999)Source: Skills adapted from Connolly, P. M. (1999). Consumer advocacy. In C. A. Shea, L. R. Pelletier, E. C. Poster, G. W. Stuart, & M. P. Verhey (Eds.), Advanced practice nursing in psychiatric and mental health care. Mosby.



ADVOCACY IS AN ESSENTIAL COMPONENT OF MASTER’S AND DNP EDUCATION

Advocacy is one of the American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) essentials of master’s education. Mas- ter’s education prepares the APN to advocate for “policies that improve the health of the public and the profession of nursing” (AACN, 2011, p. 21). Learning strategies include analyzing roles, empowerment, and values clar- ification needed to be an effective advocate. Additional learning strategies include preparing a position paper on a policy issue that advocates for a solution that is politically feasible and economically viable. As more APNs are edu- cated at the doctoral level, formal education in advocacy will increase. Doctor of nursing practice (DNP) graduates are able to “design, implement and advocate for health policy that addresses issues of social justice and equity in health care” (AACN, 2006, p. 13). Additionally, DNP graduates are educated to engage in systems-level advo- cacy by engaging in political action (AACN, 2006).

Research Evidence for APRN Advocacy
Patient advocacy at the APN level is similar to registered nurse (RN) advocacy (Hanks et al., 2019). Hanks and

his colleagues (2019) explored APN advocacy through telephone interviews with Texas APNs. Similar to RNs, the participants shared that finding resources for patients was key and a source of satisfaction. fte participants re- ported that advocacy was learned at the baccalaureate level and not formally addressed in their graduate stud- ies. However, their increased knowledge of medicine and health-care systems helped the APNs to advocate more effectively (Hanks et al., 2019).
   Perception of practice barriers was key to political advocacy in a survey of Florida APNs (Kung & Lugo, 2014). Sixty percent of the 884 respondents reported experiencing regulatory barriers to their practice, such as the inability to prescribe controlled substances, to refer patients to physical therapy, or to order home health services (Kung & Lugo, 2014). Less than a quarter of the respondents reported that they were politically active, and less than one in three (30%) were willing to talk to the media about the APN role. Higher education levels, particularly the DNP, and membership in a professional organization were asso- ciated with political advocacy (Kung & Lugo, 2014). Examples of APN advocates in action are given in Box 14.2.
Nurses’ participation in legislative advocacy is
typically through professional organizations (Taylor,



Box 14.2Advocacy Examples in APN RolesFamily Nurse Practitioner Advocates for PPEClinical Nurse Specialist Advocates to IncreaseDuring the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic,Professional VisibilitySophia ftomas, president of the American Associ-Sean Reed (2020), president of the National As-ation of Nurse Practitioners, told President Trumpsociation of Clinical Nurse Specialists (NACNS),during a White House event commemoratingis encouraging clinical nurse specialists (CNSs) toInternational Nurses Day that access to personalregister for a national provider identifier (NPI)protective equipment had been “sporadic” (Vargas,number. fte NPI, a unique 10-digit number,2020). When the president replied that wasn’t theidentifies the type of provider and is requiredcase everywhere, ftomas politely agreed, but shefor reimbursement. NPIs were created under thehad made her point (Vargas, 2020). ftomas said “IHealth Insurance Portability and Accountabilityhad a message to share. [We] are seeing shortagesAct (HIPAA) (Reed, 2020). To date, only aboutacross the country. I think he understood that, . . .10,000 of the estimated 90,000 CNSs have anand they heard it” (Vargas, 2020).NPI number.(continued)



Box 14.2Advocacy Examples in APN Roles—cont’dCNSs are categorized by the Standard Occu-	Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists (CRNA)
pational Classification (SOC) system as registered	Advocates for Full Practice Authority
nurses, not APNs. It is hoped that as more CNSs	Angela Mund, DNP, CRNA, vice president of obtain NPI numbers, CNSs will have their own	the American Association of Nurse Anesthetists, SOC category.	advocates for advanced practice nurses to have full practice authority by educating other CRNAs
Certified Nurse-Midwives Advocate for Women	and CRNA students on the responsibility of ad-
Certified nurse-midwives (CNMs) have been de-	vocacy (Mund, 2021). ften she applies education scribed as equal parts nurse, coach, and advocate	to practice by testifying on behalf of Veterans Ad- (Cleveland  Clinic,  2014).  Callister and Freeborn	ministration CRNAs (Mund oral testimony to the (2007) interviewed 10 CNMs practicing in Utah who	U.S. House of Representatives Veterans Affairs described their advocacy for women in direct care (mi-	Subcommittee on Health, May 22, 2008) and cro level) and in complex health-care systems (macro	at the South Carolina State Assembly advocating level). Advocacy is essential to increasing access to cer-	for removal of physician supervision of CRNAs tified nurse-midwifery care, which has been shown to	(https://www.scstatehouse.gov/video/archives improve pregnancy outcomes (ACNM, 2012).	.php?key=10103&part=1).
2016). To explore how advocacy efforts are sustained, Taylor (2016) recruited leaders from two regional pro- fessional organizations for a Web-based survey and follow-up focus groups. fte participants were leaders of an APN organization and a general practice RN organization (Taylor, 2016). Study results were not reported separately by organization type. Factors sus- taining advocacy included purposeful engagement in the advocacy process, collegial support, and mentor- ing by more politically experienced colleagues (Tay- lor, 2016). Respondents in this small sample agreed “on the need to build public policy advocacy into the fabric and culture of nursing from basic education through professional practice” (Taylor, 2016, p. 243). Some of the advocacy resources available to APNs are listed in Box 14.3.

SUMMARY
Advocacy is an essential APN role. Within the educa- tional setting, educators and preceptors are responsible for teaching APN students the skills and knowledge they will need to advocate effectively for their patients



as well as for systemic change in health-care delivery. Outside academia, APN organizations advocate to re- move state and federal barriers to advanced practice and care, but these organizations must be supported

by active members. APNs in all roles and settings have the opportunity as well as the responsibility to advo- cate on behalf of their clients, their profession, and the public.















Case Management and Advanced Practice Nursing
Denise Fessler and Mary Ann Christopher



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Discuss the historical background of case management.
• Relate the nature of case management to the current role of the advanced practice nurse (APN).
• Describe the evolution and importance of nurse case management.
• Illustrate the importance of case management in the current value-based health- care environment.
• Describe the case management role responsibilities, skill sets, and tools used in a
variety of clinical care settings.
• Consider various levels of education and training opportunities to prepare APNs for the case management role.




HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

Case management and advanced practice nursing share a long history in the United States. Although these terms were coined in nursing literature during the last two decades (Tahan, 1998), the roots of these concepts can be found in nursing history as early as the 1860s

(Kersbergen, 1996). Reading between the lines of health care and nursing history, it is possible to witness the evolution of the role of nurses with expert clini- cal knowledge who manage care. With the passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (PPACA), the evolution continued and at a more accel- erated pace.


249



   Case management was used in the 1860s in early settlement houses for immigrants and people living in poverty. Lillian Wald and her team assessed family needs, addressed environmental circumstances, mobilized in- formal and formal support systems, and instituted a comprehensive model of surveillance and follow-up to impact both the individual and population health (Christopher et al., 2016).
   In 1901, Mary Richmond, a social services pioneer, published a model of case coordination with the client as the core concern. Richmond’s model sought to address the lack of communication and coordination that fre- quently resulted in the duplication of services as clients moved through the system (Weil & Karls, 1985).
   U.S. public health nursing was founded toward the end of the 19th century by Lillian Wald (Dock, 1937). fte work of the public health nurse was to respond to the needs of the populations at greatest risk in society, for example, new immigrants living in tenement hous- ing, and to provide ways to reduce illness and promote health in these populations (Wald, 1915). Wald was con- sidered a visionary not only for her pioneering work in public health but also for the establishment of a nation- wide system of insurance for home-based care and the recognition of the independence and accomplishments of public health nurses. Interestingly, the public health nurses in the early 1900s were not subject to physician orders and established themselves as health educators and promoters of wellness (Frachel, 1988). fte follow- ing quote from an editorial in The Public Health Nurse written in 1919 could easily appear in today’s literature referring to the advanced practice nurse (APN) (Profes- sion of Promoting Health, 1919, p. 12):
Why not come boldly forth, one and all, and claim the right to exercise the promotion of health as a profession? fte best-educated nurses spend as many years in training to exercise their profession as physi- cians to prepare themselves for the care and scientific prevention of disease.
   ftese public health nurses were perceived as the elite in nursing because they practiced autonomously and cre- atively (Reverby, 1987). fte clinical expertise of these nurses is explained historically by the presentation of practice stories using an approach that seeks to under- stand the narrative without preconceived expectations or

judgment (Palmer, 1969). Several competencies of the public health nurse are readily elicited from historical an- ecdotes: public health nurses’ activities included “making inquiries, shrewd identification of evidence, steady plod- ding, helping others to help themselves, teaching, expla- nation and demonstration, and organizing a household to knit the family” (Zerwekh, 1992, p. 85). In short, this could be a description of today’s APN. Wald’s (1915) early experiments in community-based care left a rich legacy that is still pertinent in today’s health-care envi- ronment. Her work suggested that we:
• Create a mix of public and private programs that link effectively with health-care institutions as “value-added” or complementary to client needs.
• Use evidence-based practice as a counterbalance to
document cost-versus-effectiveness.
• Institute sufficient control over practice to produce desired outcomes.
• Have expert practitioners with sufficient education and
abilities to manage complex care (Buhler-Wilkerson, 1993).
   Wald’s legacy is similar to the interdisciplinary defini- tion of case management that was developed by the Case Management Society of America (CMSA), defining case management as “a collaborative process of assessment, planning, facilitation and advocacy for options and ser- vices to meet an individual’s and family’s health needs through comprehensive communication and available resources to promote quality cost effective outcomes” (CMSA, 2016, p. 8). fte historical anecdotes of Wald’s public health nurses demonstrate the work of expert nurses who managed care for individuals and popula- tions. ftese nurses practiced the core functions of case management: assessment, planning, linking, monitor- ing, advocacy, and outreach.
In the early 1900s, the role of the community-based
public health nurse caring for individuals expanded when the federal government mandated the United States Public Health Service to develop a system of case management with the community as the client. fteir initial charge was to coordinate larger environmental problems such as sanitation and the prevention and con- trol of epidemics. fte 1920s saw the development of the Community Chest Movement and other social planning agencies (excluding nursing) to deal with coordinating



care for families in distress and abused children. Within this same period, child guidance centers were created that experimented with multidisciplinary team planning (including nursing) to avoid duplication or fragmenta- tion of services (Kersbergen, 1996). fte thrust to ad- dress individual needs through the United States Public Health Service did not occur until passage of the Social Security Act in 1935, which provided funds to support these activities (Shonick, 1988).
   After World War II, the Veterans Administration (VA) established a center in Los Angeles for veterans’ benefits, which was its first model for “one-stop” health care. ftis was the inception of its ongoing model for a continuum of care (Weil & Karls, 1985).
  fte 1960s and 1970s witnessed a proliferation of hu- man services because of the Civil Rights Movement and President Johnson’s “War on Poverty” (Weil & Karls, 1985). ftis proliferation of newly developed programs resulted in fragmented, duplicative, and uncoordinated services that were difficult for the public to navigate. Case management enabled the consumer to become an active participant in services provided. Additional programs for people with mental illness and intellectual challenges, and legislation for health services to military personnel, continued to encourage integration of services and the development of a continuum of care. Demonstration projects in the 1970s created the role of “systems agent,” a person charged with coordinating system resources for clients and accountability for success of this movement (Intagliata, 1982).
In the 1980s, with the initiation of the prospective
payment system that included reimbursement based on diagnosis-related groups (DRGs), case management services moved beyond public health, services for those with mental illness, and VA services into the acute care hospitals. At the same time, health insurance companies initiated case management to shorten hospital stays and coordinate and manage services for participants with high costs or catastrophic illnesses (Brault & Kissinger, 1991; Mollica & Gillespie, 2003). fte implementation of health maintenance organizations (HMOs) and pre- ferred provider organizations (PPOs) as insurance prod- ucts for prepaid health-care delivery added to the frenzy to control costs while delivering quality care. Efforts to coordinate services and control costs affected the major- ity of health-care consumers by the late 1980s as prepaid

or per-case payment systems became the norm in both private and public sectors. At the start of the 21st cen- tury, HMOs and PPOs began to give way to accountable care organizations (ACOs) and medical homes (Watson, 2011). Controlling costs remains the mainstay for fiscal viability, and nurse case management continues to play a pivotal role in this arena.
  fte 1980s also ushered in demonstration projects that would go on to define case management within the context of community-based long-term care for older people and people with disabilities. Stewarded by Sen- ator Claude Pepper, a fierce advocate of services for older Americans, these demonstration projects set the stage for Medicaid waiver programs designed to offer community-based care and services in place of nursing home placement. In one innovative demonstration proj- ect, Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) paired with a Medicaid waiver initiative. Mothers of de- pendent children were trained to be home health aides to care for community-based older residents and those with disabilities in their homes. fte impetus for this project was data from the Congressional Budget Office, which estimated that up to 40% of institutionalized Americans could be more adequately and cost effectively cared for in their homes than in institutional settings. Nursing associations and advocates worked closely with the des- ignated federal and state representatives to define the role of nurse case management in this program. Nurses performed a variety of roles in this demonstration in- cluding: case management of the patients’ physiological/ psychological/social/spiritual status within the context of chronicity, mobilization of community resources, and training and supervision of home health aides. ftis framework became the foundation for large-scale dis- semination of the program, which was ultimately cod- ified in the PPACA through the Medicaid expansion of Managed Long Term Services and Supports (Home Health Care, Progress and Impediments, 1983).
Yet another long-term care (LTC) model in which
nursing case management has emerged as central is the Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE). fte model, first tested in the 1970s and 1980s, is a managed, long-term care system. fte PACE provider, through a day-care setting model, assumes financial risk for the comprehensive health and social services needs of patients. Central to the PACE model is the use of a



multidisciplinary team to establish member-centric, in- dividualized care plans that strive to provide high-quality, cost-effective, community-based health-care services for vulnerable older people. Members of the multidisci- plinary team typically include the individual and their family and/or support person along with social workers, nurse case managers, primary care providers, recreation therapists, and physical and occupational therapists. Primary care is also typically provided by the PACE program clinic, further enhancing proactive, coordi- nated care. For example, the University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing established its PACE program, called Living Independently for Elders (LIFE), using a nurse practitioner-led case management model. fte team at LIFE also applied the latest relevant gerontological re- search in the delivery of their services. As a result, LIFE was effective in enhancing participants’ functional ability while simultaneously achieving a 1.7% acute hospitaliza- tion rate for them—two-thirds of the acute care hospi- talization rate of nursing home residents (Marx, 2015). After successfully operating independently for almost 20 years, the program was acquired in 2014 by Trinity Health, the country’s largest provider of PACE. fte ex- pansion of PACE was facilitated when it was formally recognized as a provider type under the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 and further expanded under the PPACA.
On March 23, 2010, President Obama signed into
law the PPACA (https://www.gov). fte intent of this act was to ensure access to high-quality, affordable health- care coverage for 93% of all Americans. Its goal was to contain costs while delivering comprehensive care. fte act is complex and has been constitutionally challenged by several states. On June 28, 2012, the United States Supreme Court released its ruling finding PPACA to be constitutional. In the majority opinion, the constitution- ality of the individual-mandate section of the PPACA— the centerpiece of the case—was upheld. ftis individual mandate requires all Americans to buy insurance or pay a fine. fte concept of a fine was seen as unconstitutional and subsequently redefined as a tax that the government has the constitutional power to impose; the PPACA survived on that basis. fte future of the PPACA was in question under President Trump, who was not sup- portive of this legislation. Repeal or significant reform of PPACA could be a possibility, if the Congress aligns itself with the president’s sentiments.
  
Within the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Ser- vices (CMS), provisions of the PPACA created ACOs. An ACO is a network of professional care providers and settings for care, including hospitals. Each network addresses the needs of a minimum of 5,000 patients (http://kaiserhealthnews.org). An ACO is not a place but a concept contained within a corporate structure. ACO professionals include physicians, nurse practi- tioners (NPs), physician assistants (PAs), and clinical nurse specialists (CNSs) (HealthCare.gov, 2012).
  fte PPACA also affected APNs (PPACA, 2010, p. 534) by providing “a 10 percent (10%) bonus payment under Medicare for fiscal years 2011 through 2016 to primary care practitioners (including nurse practitioners, clinical nurse specialists, and physician assistants) and general surgeons practicing in health professional shortage areas” (PPACA, 2010, p. 534). fte act also turned the spotlight on medical homes. fte concept of a medical home grew from a 2002 Future of Family Medicine project that recommended that every American have a “personal medical home” through which to receive comprehensive health-care services. fte Medical Home model is designed to improve the delivery of patient-centered health care. Similar to an ACO, the Medi- cal Home is not a place but a concept that organizes primary care to meet a patient’s physical and emotional needs, utiliz- ing the entire team of providers. Additionally, the interdis- ciplinary team works with the family and other home-care providers to deliver comprehensive and coordinated health care that includes education to the whole person.
Beginning in 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic under-
scored the criticality of APNs in providing care manage- ment and health system redesign. As the crisis continues to unfold and data emerge, the role of nurses who pro- vide case and population management are integral to in- form the early and rapid redesign of the delivery system. fte following are three examples highlighting nurse case management contributions that occurred early in the
U.S. response to the pandemic. Many more examples of nurse-led case management innovations will likely un- fold as this global pandemic continues.

1. fte Commissioner of Health in New Jersey, a nurse and longtime health system CEO, designed and directed the comprehensive public health response, which was recognized as a best-in-class model in the nation (Pfaff, 2020).



2. A nurse with a doctor of nursing practice (DNP) degree at an integrated payor/ provider delivery sys- tem, with executive responsibility for the postacute network, drew on years of clinical practice and evidence-based telehealth experience to design and implement an effective triage clinical support system for determining the type and dose of in- terventional methodology for patient interaction, inclusive of in-person, telephonic, and telehealth support (Medbridge Education, 2020).
3. Nurse case managers in the inpatient setting transi- tioned from in-person rounds to telerounding with teams and patients to facilitate safe discharges. ftey expanded their transitional focus on prior authori- zation and setting of care to include a more robust consideration of the social determinants of health and behavioral health implications of COVID-19. ftis change to telerounding allowed for the effec- tive discharge of patients while simultaneously al- lowing case managers at high risk for COVID-19 themselves to continue to function as productive members of the team (Tahan, 2020).

DIFFERENTIATING THE LEVELS OF NURSE CASE MANAGEMENT PRACTICE

Historically, discussion has centered on the use of nurse case managers prepared at the baccalaureate versus the advanced practice level (Cesta & Tahan, 2003; Connors, 1993; Mahn & Spross, 1996; Tahan & Treiger, 2017). fte American Nurses Association (ANA, 1992) asserts that minimum preparation for a nurse case manager is a bachelor’s degree with 3 years of relevant experience. However, in practice, nurses functioning in case man- agement positions have differing clinical and educational backgrounds, including, in some settings, registered nurses (RNs) without a master’s degree or even a bach- elor of science in nursing (BSN) degree. fte roles and responsibilities of these nurses are also quite varied and defined in different ways, depending on the clinical site. fte Tahan and Huber study (2006) provides an analysis of changes that occurred in the practice of case manage- ment over the 5-year period between the mid-1990s and early 2000s and highlights the activities, relationships, knowledge, and skills most required since that time.
  
Connors (1993) suggested that because case man- agers serve clients with varying levels of care across the continuum, not every client who is case managed is com- plex or catastrophic. He pointed out that even though nurses with master’s degrees may be best suited to fill case management positions, this may not always be pos- sible given practice demands. One approach would be to have baccalaureate-prepared nurses manage the more routine clients and have APNs manage those clients with more complex needs. In other words, the nurse’s exper- tise “should be matched with the complexity of the sit- uation and amount of autonomy required to fulfill the role” (Connors, 1993, p. 196).
Support for the APN case management role, partic-
ularly with high-risk or high-cost client populations, has been documented in the literature (Connors, 1993; Cronin & Maklebust, 1989; Hamric, 1992; Krichbaum, 1999; Naylor et al., 2010). fte APN has expert knowl- edge regarding the clinical population for which stan- dards and pathways are written, sees the whole client, and understands the client’s needs on a continuum-of-care basis. Moreover, the APN has the additional require- ment of outcome accountability (Krichbaum, 1999).
   An expanding use of APNs is in the case manage- ment of patients with chronic diseases. Because of their education and clinical skills, APNs are able to focus on the multidimensional nature of chronic illness. One group of hospital-based clinics called on APNs to join a team effort that successfully improved clinical outcomes for patients with diabetes (Boville et al., 2007). Boden- heimer and Bauer (2016) see NPs as underutilized. Eco- nomic and clinical gains could result by allowing NPs to practice independently and as team leaders for a large number of services across settings.
   Similarly, Mahn and Zazworsky (2000) pointed out that APNs are well suited to perform case management for complex client populations because of their advanced education, autonomy, ability to conduct extensive as- sessments, and ability to initiate and modify treatment regimens. ftese authors cited the work of Connors (1993), Hamric (1992), Lamb (1992), and Mahn and Spross (1996) to describe how the competencies of the APN role mirror those of the nurse case manager. Umbrell (2006) and Curtis and colleagues (2002) demonstrated the effectiveness of the APN in trauma management. fte APN possesses specialized knowledge in providing



“direct care, consultation, research utilization/continuous quality improvement, collaboration, data analysis and information management, change agency, ethical deci- sion making and expert guidance and coaching” for a specific client population (Mahn & Zazworsky, 2000,
p. 568). Such competencies are all congruent to those of nurse case managers.
  To a lesser extent, arguments have also been pre- sented for having separate graduate programs in case management rather than simply increasing case man- agement content in existing advanced practice master’s programs (Falter et al., 1999; Sowell & Young, 1997). One argument is that APNs and CNSs who are prepared at the master’s level have the advanced clinical knowl- edge needed to care for clients with complex health- care needs, and these nurses can effectively work with

high-risk clinical populations. On the other hand, grad- uates with a master’s preparation in case management have in-depth knowledge and skill in case management models, systems, and tools; health-care financing; reim- bursement; and community resource use. ftese nurses can provide both case management services and the leadership to design systems of care coordination and quality management in health-care organizations. Grad- uates from both types of master’s programs can make a significant contribution to case management prac- tice, administration, education, and research (Cesta & Tahan, 2003; Tahan & Treiger, 2017). More research demonstrating the effectiveness of nurses who have bac- calaureate and master’s degrees is needed. See Box 15.1 for a description of the levels of nurse case management practice.




Box 15.1Differentiating Between the Nurse Case Manager With a Baccalaureate Degree or Master’s Degree as an APN and a Nurse With Specific Master’s Preparation in Case ManagementLevels of Case ManagementBaccalaureate registered nurse (RN) case manag-Nurses with master’s level preparation specifically forers have foundational theoretical and clinicalthe functional role of case manager possess expertknowledge in nursing. ftese nurses are able toknowledge and skill in case management mod-manage the care of patients who are less com-els, processes, and tools; health-care financing;plex and more predictable, often with the assis-reimbursement; outcome monitoring; and mea-tance of critical paths. ftese nurses may worksurement. ftese nurses are able to design andin collaboration with an APN case manager pre-monitor systems of care coordination and de-pared at the master’s level or a nurse case man-liver case management services and are expectedager prepared at the master’s level.to conduct research related to case managementMaster’s–APN case managers have clinical expertisepractice and clinical outcomes.and advanced knowledge in health and wellnessClinical nurse leaders (CNLs) are master’s-level pre-promotion and illness intervention models forpared nurses, specifically trained to drive the qualityspecific patient populations. ftese nurses canof patient care and population outcomes. Amongmanage patients with complex health needs,the competencies that are core to the CNL focussuch as those in high-risk, vulnerable popu-are care coordination, outcomes management,lations and those who require high resourcetransitions of care, interprofessional commu-consumption. In addition, these nurses are ex-nication and team leadership, evidence-basedpected to conduct research related to case man-practice, and quality improvement. fte CNLagement practice, disease management, andfunctions as a generalist to drive improvementsclinical outcomes.in the care of patients and population cohorts.


EDUCATION FOR NURSE CASE MANAGEMENT PRACTICE

Outside academic settings, education in case man- agement can occur via continuing education courses, institutes, and on-the-job training. Within academic settings, case management concepts may be integrated into baccalaureate- and master’s-level curricula or taught in required or elective courses. Also, at the graduate level, there are master’s programs in case management. Another model is to offer case management as a con- centration in which students take a required number of courses in addition to training in a clinical specialty or administration.
   On-the-job training or short training courses are not likely to be adequate because offering content solely in these formats cannot expose nurses to all essential knowledge bases necessary to assume case management functions. To best prepare nurses for case management practice within a value-based care environment, it is rec- ommended that educators adopt a systematic approach to the integration of case management in nursing curric- ula. Approaches to incorporating such content are de- scribed elsewhere (Mundt, 1996; Powell & Tahan, 2008; Sinnen & Schifalaqua, 1996; Sowell & Young, 1997).
  ftis recommendation is consistent with the 2016 re- port “Preparing Nurses for Roles in Population Health Management” of the National Advisory Council on Nursing Education and Practice (NACNEP). fte coun- cil adopted the definition of population health as “the health outcomes of a group of individuals, including the distribution of such outcomes within the group.” fte re- port recommended that academic institutions “develop curricular innovations that integrate population-health competencies across the nursing education pipeline from undergraduate to post-doctoral studies” (NACNEP). Key to effective case management delivered by nurses is the imperative to revise the curriculum for current nursing students while retraining nurses currently in the workforce. Revised curricula should prepare the work- force to launch population health initiatives, provide care coordination, support complex patient groups, ana- lyze data, and integrate research to drive evidence-based practice (Fraher et al., 2015).
One retraining initiative was the nine credit cur-
riculum developed by Duke  University.  ftrough

collaboration with Horizon Blue Cross/Blue Shield of New Jersey and Rutgers University College of Nursing, Duke offered the course to over 75 nurses, who were then deployed to ACOs throughout the state. ftese nurses functioned as case managers with the goal of im- proving outcomes and positioning the practices to em- brace and succeed with the tenets of the Triple AIM and value-based care. A review of 2013 claims of 200,000 members’ (both commercial and Medicare Advantage) data revealed that patients showed a 14% higher rate of improved diabetes control, a 12% higher rate of ef- fective cholesterol management, an 8% higher rate of breast cancer screenings, and a 6% higher rate of col- orectal screenings. fte total cost of care was 4% lower in the practices where care coordinators were deployed (Kelley, 2014).
At the baccalaureate level, case management should
be considered a core curriculum concept and threaded throughout the undergraduate program. At the graduate level, in addition to core graduate and specialty content, advanced practice curricula should contain theory and clinical experiences related to case management, care co- ordination across the continuum, community resource use, and managed care concepts including reimburse- ment and health-care financing. Because nurse case managers look to the skills of other health-care profes- sionals in their care planning, an interdisciplinary course would also prove invaluable.
  fte curriculum sponsored by the CMSA notes that essential elements of study include managed care, use management, and legal and ethical issues, among oth- ers. It is also noted that change is constant and that case managers must keep up with the changes in the health- care system (Powell & Ignatavicius, 2001).
   Finally, there is a need for graduate programs to prepare nurse case management specialists. Master’s programs in case management should include core graduate content as well as specialized content related to case management models, strategies, tools, quality management, health-care financing and reimbursement systems, managed care, health-care outcomes, client ed- ucation, community resources, clinical practice in case management, and role development. Coursework and clinical experiences with specific aggregate populations is highly recommended. Moreover, such curricula need to prepare graduates who can practice case management



in both inpatient and outpatient settings as well as in organizational venues, such as insurance companies. Of- fering master’s programs in case management and inte- grating case management content at the master’s level for APNs will produce practitioners who can deliver nursing case management services, create systems of care coor- dination, and institute policies that will reflect quality outcomes.
  fte DNP degree offers many new avenues of knowledge and skills to further enhance the case man- agement role of the APN. fte integration of nursing science with advanced levels of systems thinking and accountability in designing, delivering, and evaluating evidence-based practice to improve quality, safety, and outcomes should add significantly to the patient experi- ence and decrease cost. New leadership skills directed at the development and implementation of patient-driven health policy and effective collaboration with nursing and other disciplines to promote cultural competence in response to health-care needs has the potential to en- gage patients as active participants in improving their health status.

CASE MANAGER RESPONSIBILITIES AND SKILLS

Quality of care and efficient use of limited resources have been the hallmarks of case management since the 1860s, guiding the development of early settlement houses, public health nursing, federal and state leg- islation, and managed care. Regardless of who drives the process (e.g., provider, insurance company, em- ployer, federal government, or private entrepreneur), the outcome expectations are similar. The definitions of quality and efficiency may differ across institutions, but all models require a similar skill and knowledge set of their case managers. The setting in which the case manager practices, the model design, and the pa- tient population served dictate the overall knowledge base and clinical expertise required. The national quality agenda is supported by the involvement of nurse case managers. Case managers in all settings are alert to the importance of evaluation of quality and the appropriateness of care delivered to patients (White, 2004).
  
Successful nurse case management requires a wide variety of both management and clinical skills. Some typical management skills include delegation, conflict resolution, collaboration, crisis intervention, coordina- tion, direction, consultation, and fiscal accountability. Clinical skill requirements vary from model to model and may include nurses educated from the diploma/ associate degree to the master’s level. fte suggested prac- tice areas for differing levels of education (baccalaure- ate to master’s) are also discussed in this chapter. Nurses educated at the diploma/associate degree level frequently find themselves in positions in nurse case management similar to the baccalaureate RN case manager described in Box 15.1. A summary of the most common skills and competencies of nurse case managers is found in Table 15.1. ftis table is not meant to be an exhaustive listing of skills and competencies but rather a snapshot view of what is needed by nurse case managers in varying situations.
Nurse case management continues to be a hybrid
within nursing and has led many to examine the issue of “clinical expertise” as listed in the job descriptions of case managers. Calkin (1984), in attempting to differen- tiate between the expertise of a nurse case manager and an APN case manager, defined the former as expert by experience and the latter as prepared by a combination of clinical experience and education. fte advanced prac- tice case managers retain their use of experience-based intuition but use their additional academic and clinical preparation to manage highly complex and unpredict- able individuals and populations. Although the focus of advanced practice case managers is still on providing direct patient care, they also make significant contri- butions toward coordination of multidisciplinary care. ftis advanced practitioner in a case manager role can continue to monitor, advocate, and coordinate care for patients across the continuum and can develop programs and systems to support both community-based and pri- vate practice–based care (Erickson, 1997).
Not all case managers practice the duties and respon-
sibilities of managing patient care at the same advanced level. As nurse case managers become involved in more complex cases, the need for advanced education be- comes apparent. ftis growth in complexity has resulted in the need for APNs to join the ranks of case managers (Stanton et al., 2005).


   TaBle 15.1	
Skills and Competencies of the Nurse Case Manager

Skill or CompetencyGoalPatient advocacyAssist patient in achieving autonomy and self-determinationGuardian of confidentialityPreserve dignity and privacyCase selection expertIdentify recipients of case managementCare coordinatorProcure and broker services; seamless continuumAssessment and reassessmentIdentify problem and resolution; monitor outcomesDischarge plannerFacilitate movement in care continuumFollow-throughProvide optimum care within resources availableUse managementUse resources appropriatelyKnowledge of insurance structures and benefitsInterpret resources available to the patientCost-benefit analysis (fiscal advocacy)Demonstrate case management effect on care, usually monetaryNegotiationProcure what the patient requires for health purposesClinical expertise*Intervene appropriately, improve outcomesCritical thinkingThink out of the box to find creative solutions and increase case manager autonomyCompetent professional (includes accountability, knowledge of standards of practice, legal issues, and research ability)Do the right thing at the right time for the right reasonOutcomes managementEvaluate and manage outcomesInterpersonal (communication, assertiveness, collaboration, and tact or diplomacy)Gather information and channel to appropriate sourcesOrganizational (time management, marketing or networking, prioritization, and report writer)Use time and people resources wisely*Depends on case management model and setting.
Source: From More, P. K., & Mandell, S. (1997). Nursing case management: An evolving practice. McGraw-Hill; Powell, S. K. (2000). Case management: A practice guide to success in managed care. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

ftrough the development of clinical expertise, knowl- edge of research processes, communication skills, crit- ical thinking, decision making, and leadership skills, the APN is uniquely qualified to influence case man- agement and chronic care management in a variety of

health-care environments. fte strategic use of APNs in the case management role to improve communication and collaboration with the treatment team is an effective tool given the importance of primary care practitioner involvement in the success of case and chronic care management interventions. Evidence-based interven- tions and standardized outcome measures are important



strategies used in chronic care management programs to improve the quality of health-care services. In an effort to assist case managers and program designers to iden- tify effective tools and evidence-based guidelines for case management and to standardize the evaluation of the outcomes of case management interventions, the CMSA created the Council for Case Management Accountabil- ity (CCMA) in 1996 (Aliotta, 2000). ftrough the use of expert case management researchers and practitioners, the CCMA identified five care domains and outcomes in which case management has been shown or is believed to have an effect:
• Patient knowledge: Case management patients need adequate knowledge on several fronts, including knowledge about health benefits and services, knowl- edge about their health conditions, and knowledge about their treatment plans. Successful case manage- ment results in improved patient knowledge.
• Patient involvement in care: Health care is a coopera-
tive endeavor; patients play a key role in high-quality, cost-effective care. Successful case management in- volves clients in the decisions and actions of self-care.
• Patient empowerment: Case management should help
patients build a sense of self-efficacy regarding their ability to manage their own health as well as an ability to negotiate the care system successfully.
• Patient adherence: Cost-effective health care is predi-
cated on patients’ consistent adherence to their treat- ment programs. Successful case management results in higher rates of patient adherence.
• Coordination of care: Case managers provide consis-
tency of care across the continuum while eliminating redundancy and waste (Aliotta, 2000).
   Progress to correlate case-management practices with improved outcome measures begun by the CCMA has continued through the continued research of Rufus Howe, a member of the CCMA expert team (Howe, 2005). fte combined use of the CCMA domains with the Iowa Interventions and Outcomes Project Nursing Interventions Classification System (NIC/NOC), was an integral part of an effective oncology care manage- ment program that received the inaugural CMSA pro- cess improvement in case management practice award (Jacoby & McCabe, 2011). ftis author (Denise Fessler), who developed the case management program that used

the domains with the NIC/NOC, was also a member of the CCMA expert team.
   fte CCMA domains continue to be relevant, partic- ularly their emphasis on patient and family engagement in health care. Use of assessment tools such as the Patient Activation Measure, PAM® (Hibbard et al., 2004) are ef- fective in assisting APNs and others to understand the importance of their patients’ activation level and to tai- lor case management interventions accordingly. ftrough the use of an assessment tool and associated interven- tions, APNs can determine which specific strategies to deploy with a patient—matching interventions to the level of activation. Industry experts from the American Medical Group Association (AMGA) recommend de- ploying the PAM during patient onboarding using either a paper survey or electronic health record (EHR). ftis allows providers to use the score from the onset when designing case management plans (Heath, 2017).
   Little is known to date regarding the amount or type (or “dose”) of nursing case management needed to affect patient outcomes. ftis knowledge is necessary in ap- plying case and chronic care management interventions (Brooten & Naylor, 1995). For example, several pub- lished studies have been highlighting the effectiveness of APNs as case managers for Medicare-aged members with heart failure. fte questions become: Is it necessary for the APN to have direct patient interaction or contact at the primary care office or clinic or in the home, or is it just as effective to use telemedicine approaches with this population? Should the use of the APN be applied to high-risk chronic care management, or should APNs be included in health education and promotion strategies? What interventions provide the most effective quality of care, satisfaction, and financial outcomes? fte contin- ued evaluation and support of new payment and delivery models is beginning to shed light on the amount and timing of nursing “doses.” fte COVID-19 pandemic is likely to be the proving ground for new care manage- ment delivery approaches and may answer many of these questions.
Another strategy used to ensure high-quality, effective
case management processes and outcomes is the develop- ment of electronic medical records (EMRs) and database systems with care management assessment, planning, and outcomes tracking capabilities. Systems that alert the treatment team to gaps in care—for example,



abnormal biometric data and non–evidence-based treat- ment regimens—improve patient outcomes as well. Sharing data between disparate systems has become a major concern for health-care providers and payers as they assume accountability for population health man- agement and financial outcomes in value-based purchas- ing agreements with CMS.
   Finally, and most important, tools used to identify those individuals who can most benefit from exceptional case management services and interventions that focus on communication and relationship building are criti- cal. Predictive models and algorithms that produce reg- istries of chronically ill high-risk patients have become important tools in early identification of individuals who could benefit most from case management services (Forman & Kelliher, 1999). For example, researchers from the University of Pennsylvania and Independence Blue Cross analyzed the claims history of Medicare Ad- vantage beneficiaries with congestive heart failure and validated the impact of a predictive algorithm in the deployment of case management. Health plan members were assigned a risk score in a random control study that included medical and pharmacy claims, laboratory re- sults, demographic information, and other relevant data points. ftose with the highest risk score received care coordination intervention, which resulted in a 38% re- duction in emergency department (ED) visits and a 20% reduction in cardiologist visits compared to the control group (David et al., 2019). Nurse case managers are in- creasingly involved in developing and utilizing predic- tive tools to enhance the efficacy of their interventions.
Additional training and development in techniques
such as motivational interviewing and intrinsic coaching increases the case manager’s ability to improve a person’s ability to make choices and seek relevance and value in making health changes that directly relate to their life goals (Miller & Rollnick, 2002). A review of the lit- erature suggests that motivational interviewing offers promise for eliciting health behavior change in older patients (Purath et al., 2014). Further, case manage- ment for specialty populations is benefitted by the in- tegration of motivational interviewing. Oncology nurse case managers trained in motivational interviewing had positive and differential effectiveness in addressing the lifestyle behaviors and psychosocial needs of cancer pa- tients and survivors (Spencer & Wheeler, 2016). ftese

studies underscore the importance of embedding moti- vational interviewing into the educational curricula of case managers.

Cultivated Intuition
Another case management tool that is frequently ob- served and successfully used in practice but often not acknowledged in case management literature nor quan- tified in nursing research (Hassani et al., 2016) is cul- tivated intuition. According to Maravankin (2019), intuition is the knowledge that comes from outside the thinking brain (your heartfelt senses or gut feelings), when you aren’t sure how or why you know. In contrast, the rational mind relies on deliberate processing and conscious reasoning. Cultivating intuition is the work of developing our intuitive capabilities. Mindfulness prac- tices such as meditation, heart-focused breathing tech- niques, and reflection hone or cultivate the intuitive skill set of business executives (Maravankin, 2019). ftese same practices may be effective for clinical leaders as well. Nowadays, clinical care focuses on evidence-based practice, causing us to neglect the importance of and to rarely describe the use of tacit or intuitive knowledge (Welsh & Lyons, 2001). Suzanne Powell (2008) asked, “Why does intuition matter to the practice of case man- agement?” In answering this question, she described how case managers instinctively knew when a discharge from the hospital was destined to fail unless the case manager put together a “Plan B.” She also noted that listening to the patient and/or family’s intuition and feelings may even be more critical (Powell, 2008). fte obituary of a highly respected, well-published scholarly pediatrician highlights the importance of cultivated intuition as an essential tool in effective case management. His obituary noted that his mantra was one his father (also a pedia- trician) taught him: “Always believe the mother” (Pitts- burgh Post-Gazette, 2020). “Rather than repressing our intuitive thinking, we need to cultivate our intuition, be more mindful, and listen to our voice and the voice of our patients and their caretakers. For not listening to intuition can have devastating effects for patients” (H. Tahan, personal communication, August 20, 2020). fteresa Brown (2018) reported that two brothers— one a data scientist, another an engineer—wondered if their mother’s death could have been prevented had



there been a better way to track her signs of distress. fte brothers ultimately created the Rothman Index (RI), which uses a line chart to warn clinicians of increased patient risk based on data in the clinical chart, such as nursing assessments and notes, that had previously been overlooked by treating practitioners. In practice, the Yale New Haven Health System deployed a specialized SWAT team of nurses to use the RI to coordinate care for the sickest patients. ftis instrument may ultimately validate what nurses have known all along: that well- honed clinical instincts matter (Brown, 2018).

NURSE CASE MANAGEMENT MODELS

A review of the literature provides many types of case management models and differentiates the contributions each makes within a designated field. fte common as- pects of these models are advocacy, services brokering, risk management, care coordination, and a process de- signed to accomplish these objectives (Huber, 2000). Knollmueller (1989) identified seven models of case management: (a) social, (b) primary care, (c) medical/ social, (d) HMO, (e) independent, (f ) insurance, and
(g) in-house. Stempel and associates (1997) describe four types of nurse case management: (a) clinical case management, (b) payer-based case management, (c) program case management, and (d) community case management.
   More recently Daniels and Ramey (2005) proposed the use of five main models of case management that they have observed: (a) clinical case management, (b) collaborative practice models, (c) populations models,
(d) functional models, and (e) clinical resource manage- ment models. In commenting on these models, Zander (2008) noted that some hospitals are using APNs to fill the case-management functions alone or working with other case management personnel. A multidisciplinary team at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Pub- lic Health designed the Guided Care Model for the better care of older people with chronic conditions. In this model, a primary care RN trained in chronic care works with two to five physicians and members of the care team to provide patient-centered, coordinated, and cost-effective care. fteir research demonstrated that the Guided Care Model improved the self-reports of chronic

health care for multiple-morbid older persons (Boyd et al., 2009).
   fte literature on nurse case manager practice within the different models reflects some dilemmas regarding the pur- pose, scope, and functions of the nurse case manager role. Although there is a large body of anecdotal stories, research in the field is still working to control the effect of extrane- ous variables in studies and developing nursing-sensitive outcomes. Qualitative descriptions of nurse case man- agement practice have pointed to some common themes across all nurse case management practice. ftey include
(a) working with individuals, families, and populations at risk; (b) applying the nursing process to enhance quality and cost outcomes; (c) accessing individuals and families in more than one setting; and (d) coordination and advo- cacy integrated throughout (Lamb, 1995).
   Hellwig and colleagues proposed an advocacy model for nurse case management practice. In the authors’ qualitative study, hospital-based nurse case managers de- scribed advocacy based on the needs of the patient and the patient’s family as well as payer issues and identified obstacles and opportunities for advocacy. Participants indicated that obstacles included time constraints; ex- amples of opportunities were physician support, rapport with insurance companies, and use of a team approach (Hellwig et al., 2003).
   fte nurse case management models used in practice today are as rich and diverse as the individuals, fami- lies, and populations they serve. Current practice within hospital-based models in many organizations has moved from a primarily clinical case manager role to a collabo- rative one that spans the continuum of care. In addition, the hospital-to-community-based and community-based models have experienced an increasing need for a high level of clinical expertise in their case managers as well as the traditional knowledge of community resources and health-care reimbursement methodologies. As models continue to evolve in response to practice needs and en- vironmental changes, the models for the 21st century must continue to include and enhance the role that APNs can and do play in community-based practice models. According to Zander (2008), case management models that are reviewed at the executive level in hospital and postacute care service providers are considered very expensive. In light of this, we need more cost-benefit re- search on case management efforts and models.



   To achieve that goal, the CMS created fte Inno- vation Center Home that “develops new payment and service delivery models . . . in accordance with the So- cial Security Act” as well as the Affordable Care Act (PPACA) and additional subsequent legislation. CMS organized its models into seven categories:
1. Accountable Care Organizations
2. Episode-Based Payment Initiatives
3. Primary Care Transformation/Medical Homes
4. Initiatives Focused on the Medicaid and CHIP population
5. Initiatives Focused on the Medicare-Medicaid Enrollees
6. Initiatives to Accelerate the Development and Test- ing of New Payment and Service Delivery Models
7. Initiatives to Speed the Best Practice
   Individual case-management models are too nu- merous to detail here, but early on, they were catego- rized into “within the walls” and “beyond the walls.” In devising their own case management models today, health-care providers consider the factors that impact models of case management such as those proposed by Tahan. ftese are the context of the care setting (acute, long term, etc.), the patient population served, the re- imbursement method, and the care providers needed (Tahan & Campagna, 2010). Other models include the AIDS Institute Models of Case Management described as comprehensive case management and supportive case management (https://www.health.ny.gov/diseases).
Case management or care-coordination models
evolve over time. For patients with complex needs, we are seeing more models that focus on care transitions. ftis Transitional Care Model (TCM) has improved care for older adults at risk for readmission within the 30-day post-discharge window. Some variations on this model use geriatric NPs to manage care from inpatient to home or long-term care facilities (Hirschman et al., 2015). Un- der the ACA, “a variety of transitional care programs and services have been established to improve quality and re- duce costs” (Naylor et al., 2011).
   One such evolved model of case management is the Advanced Illness Management Model (AIM) at Sutter Health funded as a CMMI demonstration. An interdis- ciplinary team approach centered around the nurse case managers, AIM integrates home health and hospice to

create a palliative-care bridge for patients and families. Team members include physicians, NPs, social workers, and community health workers. AIM case managers of- ten follow patients for months or even years and man- age the care across all settings. Relative to a comparative group, AIM enrollees received hospice care at some point during the final months of life and had longer and more meaningful lengths of stay. AIM reduced hospital days by 1,361 per 1,000 beneficiaries, death in hospital by 8.2%, individual inpatient payments by $6,127, and total cost of care in the last 30 days of a person’s life by $5,657. ftese results facilitated the development of a serious ill- ness payment model announced in April 2019, which is expected to transform primary care and case management across the U.S. health-care system (Stuart et al., 2019).
fte TCM and the Patient-Centered Medical Home
(PCMH) focus on the health-care needs of older adults by incorporating integrated, multidisciplinary teams along with the patient and family caregivers. fte cre- ation of these models finds support in the Institute of Medicine (IOM) report The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health that addresses the importance of efforts of nurses to lead change. Most TCM models are nurse-led and always include interdisciplinary co- ordination. Social workers are often key players in the success of case/care management models and in some health-care facilities take the lead role in newly designed models of care.

CHRONIC CARE MANAGEMENT
AND THE ROLE OF THE ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSE


APNs have played an active role in both acute and chronic care management, particularly as case managers within the acute and community care settings. Research has found many benefits of using APNs in the case- management role, in particular qualities such as clinical expertise and improved access and communication with treating physicians in the community. ftis improved ac- cess and communication, along with the expert clinical knowledge regarding a particular disease state, can result in observable improved outcomes for individual patients receiving treatment for these targeted conditions within disease management programs.



   According to Watts and colleagues (2009), APNs in case management led multidisciplinary teams to achieve significant gains in patient self-management, decision support, and delivery-system design. Because APNs are trained to think holistically, to foster team building (a factor in implementing planned care), and to educate and motivate patients, they are particularly needed in multidisciplinary/group-based practices such as the PCMH or the ACO that strive to address the needs of chronically ill members (Dancer & Courtney, 2010; Naylor & Kurtzman, 2010; Watts et al., 2009).
   Some research has been conducted on the cost-effectiveness of APN management of patients with chronic illness. Paez and Allen (2006) evaluated the cost-effectiveness of APN case management to lower blood lipids in patients with coronary heart disease. fteir findings “suggest that case management by an APN is a cost-efficient and therapeutically effective strat- egy in managed care, to improve the care of patients with cardiovascular disease” (p. 439). However, financial out- comes associated with the application of various models of nurse case management have varied, particularly when applied to large, vulnerable populations and subjected to rigorous statistical evaluation methods. For example, a study published in the New England Journal of Medicine (Finkelstein et al., 2020) noted that Massachusetts In- stitute of Technology (MIT) researchers found that the Camden Coalition of Healthcare Providers, which runs one of the nation’s best known “hotspotting” programs providing coordinated care for frequently hospitalized patients, did not reduce hospital admissions. Although the program appeared to lower readmissions by nearly 40%, the same kind of patients who received regular care saw a nearly identical decline in hospital stays (Dizikes, 2020). Dr. Jeffrey Brenner, who served as executive di- rector of the organization from 2006 to 2017 and whose development of the hotspotting concept received sub- stantial public attention, noted that the Camden Coa- lition underestimated how few resources were available to help the patients it identified for care coordination. “Putting a patient with numerous chronic conditions in touch with a primary care provider for 15 minutes or finding someone a treatment program while that per- son was still living on the streets or in a shelter is not enough to make a significant difference in hospitaliza- tions” (Abelson, 2020). Dr. Mary Naylor, who deploys

a similar Transitions in Care Model, noted that her re- search has seen some promise; however, the program has been deployed on a much smaller population of patients when compared to the Camden Coalition (Abelson, 2020). As noted previously, more research is needed to identify the correct “dose” of nursing intervention needed, particularly when applying models to different study populations such as those affected by social deter- minants of health.

The Advanced Practice Nurse: Chronic Care Management Examples
Example 1: The APN in the Program Development Role in a Managed Care Setting
K is a typical APN care manager within the managed care setting. She has a strong clinical background in on- cology. As part of her role in the medical management department, K was recently asked to participate in the strategic planning for the development of a new care management program.
   Expert clinical knowledge and an ability to apply this knowledge are critical in the development of success- ful care management interventions for managed care. Knowledge of a particular disease process is essential to identify the applicability of disease management inter- ventions. For example, many conditions are considered to be potential targets for disease management primarily because of a high prevalence or high costs of prevent- able complications associated with the particular disease. However, not all diseases can effectively be managed us- ing disease management program principles. fte hall- mark of these programs is coordination of health-care services and improving self-care measures. fte APN’s ex- pert clinical knowledge of a particular disease state and their knowledge of the care provided within the health- care system can identify critical junctures at which dis- ease management interventions can be the most effective. Cancer is prevalent among commercial populations and is also a high-cost disease state; it is also considered to be a difficult disease to manage. K noted that many individuals with cancer are admitted to the hospital because of the side effects of chemotherapeutic agents. With education and improved self-care measures, could these admissions be avoided? Could this be the critical juncture in managing avoidable costs? K used both her



clinical knowledge and her knowledge of the care pro- vided within the health-care system in her evaluation of cancer as a potential target for disease management. She then proceeded to recommend the design of an educa- tion packet and telephonic outreach protocol focusing on pre-hydration for members undergoing chemother- apy to prevent dehydration admissions and on dietary considerations in the prevention of anemia. She designed an educational packet to include reputable Web sites for lay review of the national cancer treatment protocols as well as several community resources and support groups. ftrough her knowledge of the disease process and will- ingness to seize an opportunity for improved care, K identified a key juncture for focused disease manage- ment intervention. fte rate of admissions for the com- plications of chemotherapy—specifically dehydration and anemia—are the clinical outcome measures that will determine the success of this program.
In addition, collaboration with the treating oncolo-
gist to support the physician’s treatment plan and en- courage patient participation in the program is critical. fte APN, working with the health plan’s medical direc- tor, can assist in meeting this goal.
Example 2: The APN’s Role in Quality and Performance Improvement
M is an APN with extensive experience in hospice care. M, as a newly hired APN in the hospital’s new popu- lation health program, notes that the average length of stay in hospice care at the facility was 2 weeks or less and that many patients with terminal conditions did not receive the benefits of hospice care. M suggests that there be an evaluation of end-of-life care for disease manage- ment. Improvements in the quality of care provided in these circumstances may result in the reduction of acute-service admissions and improved quality of life, particularly through early advanced care planning, pain management, and support of individuals and families through dying and death experience.
ftis example demonstrates the need to have APNs
in the population health-care development process con- sistently in search of areas for improvement and disease management intervention. With frequent review of the literature and observation of trends, the APN frequently identifies, plans, and implements care management solu- tions. Rather than reacting to market forces and trends,

the APN, as a member of the population health man- agement team, consistently seeks areas for continued improvement and service to clients. fte health system that uses this intellectual capital is provided with care solutions that proactively provide value to its customers facing escalating health-care costs and address variability in the quality of care received and that also differentiate the organization from reactive competitors.
Example 3: The APN’s Role in High-Risk Population Management Within the Patient-Centered Medical Home
J is an APN specializing in family medicine within a primary care practice that uses a patient-centered med- ical home model. fte practice accepted an offer to participate in an ACO agreement and last year began providing primary care services for a distinct popula- tion of fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries. Part of the agreement provides for shared savings in the event that certain quality, satisfaction, and cost measures are met. Early results showed that the practice was not meeting targets for clinical quality and cost measures; in addition, they had a poor completion rate of annual wellness visits by the population. fterefore, the primary care practice lead assigned J to evaluate and make practice changes to improve the outcomes for this population.
In evaluating the population, J noted that a small
percentage (5%) of the population was driving up costs for the whole group. Further analysis of the top 5% re- vealed that members of this cohort had similar profiles— chronic illness with frequent exacerbations and high reliance on acute care services, poor completion rate of annual wellness examinations, and end-of-life care without benefit of advanced care planning. Behavioral health issues were also evident among this population. In general, this population of patients in rural Pennsylva- nia was seen in the office episodically—only when there were issues or need for medication changes.
   J was newly hired, along with a physician who had experience with population health and medical home principles. Together they devised a system by which the high-risk population that was frequently admitted to the hospital (more than 2×/year) would be encouraged to be seen at the primary care office by the APN as often as necessary or desired. J established an open-access sched- ule, ensuring that time would be blocked in her daily



schedule to accommodate last-minute visits. Each of these patients would be encouraged by the APN as well as the office staff to schedule an annual wellness visit at each in-person or telephonic encounter. J also worked with patients and their families to articulate their wishes related to end-of-life care with the goal of establishing advance directives for all patients in this cohort popu- lation. Total admissions to the hospital, annual wellness assessment completion rates, percentage of advance di- rectives on file, satisfaction, and total costs of care were calculated by J. ftis population was called the “frequent flyer club,” given how frequently they utilized the hos- pital as their point of care. With increased access to primary care, hospitalization rates were decreased, and annual wellness visits and presence of advance directives were increased substantially (greater than 50%) within a short period (6 months). Quality and cost metric im- provements were realized after 1 year for the entire pop- ulation at risk.
Example 4: The APN’s Role in Population Health Management
C and A are two advanced practice nurses; C works in a health plan and A for an urban-based medical center in an underserved community. fte two APNs partnered to create a community-based case management model that would reduce health disparities, focus on geomap- ping, and integrate community health workers into the interprofessional team. Together they worked with team members and data scientists to identify high-risk mem- bers within four designated ZIP codes in the city. fte majority of residents were African American and strug- gled disproportionately with hypertension, obesity, and diabetes mellitus. Mental illness was frequently undiag- nosed and untreated. Compared with other ZIP codes nationally, this neighborhood was beset by social deter- minants of health (SDOH) risks, such as high crime, food insecurity, housing insecurity, and transportation shortfalls. fte APNs developed a predictive algorithm for member identification, the community-based prac- tice model, the community-based resource network, and the funding mechanism to support the model. fte team on the ground consisted of the APN, nurse case man- ager, social worker, and two community health workers (CHW).
  
Recognizing that violence and housing insecurity drove a neighborhood need for a safe place to congre- gate, the APN approached hospital administration to designate and renovate a nearby hospital-owned resi- dence as a drop-in center for the neighborhood resi- dents. ftis center served as an outpost for group classes, peer support, nutrition education, and meal prepara- tion. With an average length of stay in the program of 60 days, the nurse case managers focused on providing comprehensive health assessments, reducing gaps in care, connecting the patients to primary care practices and mental health services, and addressing medication reconciliation. fte CHWs, recruited directly from the neighborhood, addressed myriad SDOH factors, includ- ing securing subsidized housing for patients, arranging for van transport to and from physician visits, and ac- cessing food through a local pantry. fte early results of the program show promise with a 36% increase in access to mental health services and an over 20% reduction in avoidable ED visits and hospital readmissions. Patient feedback is consistently positive.

REIMBURSEMENT AND MARKETING OF CASE MANAGEMENT PRACTICE


Physicians’ current procedural terminology (CPT) codes are used for the reimbursement of case management services in a fee-for-service environment. fterefore, cli- nicians who normally bill for services using the CPT coding system, such as physicians and APNs, can bill for their time delivering case management services in the outpatient setting. CMS and managed care organiza- tions have also begun to pay for improvement in quality of chronic care management, transitions in care, patient access, and cost-effectiveness.
   As more physician groups enter shared-savings, ACOs, Accountable Care Arrangements (ACAs), and value-based care arrangements, predictive modeling and case management services—no matter what they’re called—have become the solution to managing the health risks of the small percentage of individuals who drive the largest percentage of health-care expenditures. In addition, it is not uncommon for case management to be a revenue-generating option/service line for hospitals



and managed care organizations affected or motivated by health-care reform and new reimbursement models. Case management services and the systems or tools used to support these activities are in high demand. Conse- quently, APNs with exceptional case management skills and experience are valuable.
   A negative consequence of the popularity and use of case management solutions across the continuum of care has been the lack of coordination of case manage- ment services. For example, it is not uncommon for a patient at the time of discharge from the hospital to have a case manager in the hospital, a disease-state case man- ager (usually an NP) specific for their condition, and a community-based case manager all provided by the hospital (particularly if the hospital health system has assumed risk for the patient’s care outcomes as part of an ACO) along with a nurse navigator at the hospital- owned PCP office. If the patient is discharged to a postacute care provider such as a skilled nursing facility or a home health provider, these settings typically will also deploy a case manager. It is ironic that the role of the case manager was established to reduce fragmenta- tion and improve coordination of care.
Multiple case managers with multiple titles, educa-
tional backgrounds, and experiences not only have led to patient confusion but have also contributed to duplica- tion of services, resulting in higher administrative costs of care. Solutions to these problems include third-party

payors delegating (and reimbursing for) case manage- ment and population health management directly to network providers who attain National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) accreditation. Another solu- tion is the designation of one nurse navigator to coordi- nate care across the continuum of care, usually within a vertically integrated health system. Care management role definitions and delineations are, therefore, a critical consideration in effective population care management models and solutions.

SUMMARY


ftis chapter has explored the historical roots of the case manager role, identified levels of practice for nurse case managers, and described various case management mod- els. In addition, case management roles and skills as well as tools and strategies have been presented. fte chapter has highlighted the issues of chronic care management for APNs, reimbursement, marketing, and education for practice. Clearly, this is an exciting and challenging time to be an APN within a case management practice environment. ftose who successfully grasp the role and function will help create solutions for tomorrow’s health- care challenges. Moreover, they will ensure that as nurs- ing grows and develops, it will continue to provide the nation with innovative care models.















The Advanced Practice Nurse and Research
Beth Quatrara and Dale Shaw



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Integrate research into advanced  practice.
• Facilitate the implementation of collaborative research practices.
• Adopt research practices that are feasible within the clinical setting.
• Foster the integration of resources and structures that support clinical research.
• Identify elements that contribute to a successful clinical research study.
• Instill research mentorship.
• Solidify a culture of clinical research.





INTRODUCTION

fte advanced practice nurse (APN) consumes, facilitates, consolidates, and leads research. fte APN is obligated to apply research, monitor outcomes, and disseminate find- ings. As an APN, the clinician is responsible for developing a research attitude in others and fostering research-based practice through the integration of scientific findings into clinical practice. Additionally, the APN is expected to


apply the scientific method to solve clinical problems and address gaps in the literature to improve outcomes. ftis chapter discusses research competencies and behaviors and practical methods for the APN to successfully inte- grate research activities into practice. Building a research culture and addressing barriers to the APN research role are discussed. Most importantly, the chapter discusses how the APN expands the practice environment to embrace research as an essential element of routine clinical care.


266



RESEARCH AS A ROLE OF THE APN

fte APN, a practice-based clinician with graduate edu- cation, is educated to embrace inquiry and contribute to nursing knowledge. APNs’ education and clinical expertise contribute to their unique potential to be consumers of research while understanding the nuances of applying the new knowledge to patient-specific situations and unique practice settings. APNs translate research into practice and pragmatically implement the findings to provide high-quality care. By promoting research-based practice through knowledge and skill acquisition, APNs help to re- duce barriers to the theory-research-practice transition gap that plagues the clinical environment (Leach & Tucker, 2018; Melnyk et al., 2012). Research is a long-standing core competency of the APN role, regardless of the prac- tice setting or specific role function (American Association of Colleges of Nursing [AACN], 2006, 2011). It is not limited to a few clinicians practicing in a defined area.
Today, the role of the APN as a researcher is stressed
in both education and practice. fte Essentials of Mas- ter’s Education in Nursing requires that APNs graduate with the knowledge and skill to translate and integrate scholarship into practice (AACN, 2011). Schools of nursing that graduate master’s-prepared nurses are re- quired to demonstrate that APNs are trained to apply research outcomes within practice settings, resolve prac- tice problems, work as change agents, and disseminate results (AACN, 2011). Similarly, the doctorate of nurs- ing practice (DNP) degree emphasizes scholarly practice focused on practice improvement and innovation as well as testing care delivery models (AACN, 2006). DNP graduates, with their focus on practice, are differentiated from PhD graduates with DNPs “prepared to generate new knowledge through innovation of practice change, the translation of evidence and the implementation of quality improvement (QI) processes in specific practice settings, systems or with specific populations to improve health or health outcomes” (AACN, 2015, p. 2). fte APN role in research is further endorsed in the American Nurses Association’s (ANA) Scope and Standards of Prac- tice (2015), noting that APNs integrate research findings into practice in addition to demonstrating competency behaviors that require APNs to “contribute to nursing knowledge by conducting or synthesizing research and

other evidence that discovers, examines and evaluates current practice, knowledge, theories, criteria, and cre- ative approaches to improve healthcare outcomes” as well as to “promote a climate of collaborative research and clinical inquiry” and to “disseminate research findings through activities such as presentations, publications, consultations and journal clubs” (ANA, 2015, p. 78). ftese educational requirements and practice statements clarify and reinforce APNs’ role in research. APNs’ unique contributions as consumers of and contributors to research are recognized and required on many levels.

APN RESEARCH COMPETENCIES


Research is an expected skill that may initially intimi- date the APN. However, similar to other core compe- tencies, research competence readily develops over time. fte APN gains research confidence and proficiency though research-based practice (DePalma, 2009). fte APN facilitates the application of research by engaging team members in the process. When responding to clin- ical questions, the APN guides others to the literature, teaches them how to critique research, and evaluates the potential for practice change as appropriate to the findings. Serving as a research coach, the APN facilitates the integration of research findings into practice with attention to the patient, nurse, and the quality of the sci- ence. Taking into consideration change agency, resource availability, and educational needs, the APN influences quality of care. fte APN uses a variety of forums to demonstrate this competency, including role modeling, journal clubs, clinical rounds, and practice meetings.
As a component of the implementation plan, the
APN defines the outcome measurement and outlines the evaluative process. Using outcomes research, the clini- cian explores the impact of integrating research findings into practice (De Palma, 2009). Measuring outcomes to determine the effectiveness of change is essential to the research role. Outcome results are used to make a final decision about sustaining the change, modifying the practice change, or placing the intervention on hold. De- fining outcome measures before implementing change is required to measure effectiveness. fte outcomes must link directly to the intervention and may include indices



such as clinical outcomes, satisfaction, time, and money. Determining specific measurements, the method of data collection, and the party or parties responsible for the data collection are essential to the evaluation process. Several outcome-measurement resources that may assist clinicians in the evaluation process are listed in Box 16.1. In addition to clinical practice evaluation, APNs are also obligated to examine their own practice by evalu- ating the effects of their role. APN-specific outcomes, which can be similar to practice outcomes, are measured to showcase role efficacy, demonstrate research role com- petency, and validate APNs’ unique contributions to patient care. Collecting APN role-specific outcome mea- sures is an important aspect of practice that should not
be overlooked (Bryant-Lukosius et al., 2016).
   As APNs gain research competency, they work with interprofessional team members to design and imple- ment studies that have implications for nursing practice (De Palma, 2009). fte benefits of collaborative research include shared expertise, increased academic influence, greater access to clinical populations, more efficient data collection, improved research relevance, and the creation of an environment that promotes the application of scholarship in patient care (Cacchione, 2019; Gettrust et al., 2016; Migliore et al., 2020).
   ftere are also benefits to collaborative research with APN peers. For example, a collaborative research net- work supported by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) united research among primary

Nurse Practitioners Network for Research (AANPNR), APNs across participating states are sharing data and de- signing studies to meet their clinical needs and enhance nursing knowledge. Since 2002, this practice-based re- search network has contributed to the development of several practice-focused studies on various topics, includ- ing chronic pain, health literacy, obesity, and immuniza- tions (AHRQ, 2012). Today, the organization’s efforts are continuing to expand through Web-based platforms and data-collection opportunities coordinated through surveys and focus groups (AANPNR, 2020). APNs collaborate in the research process and disseminate findings through publications and presentations. Partnering with colleagues to build skills in preparing manuscripts and responding to editor requests contributes to the APN’s professional growth in the research role (Migliore et al., 2020) while working with peers provides support and encouragement. Although research skills are taught in graduate edu- cation, they must be honed upon entry into advanced practice. Efforts aimed at integrating research-based prac- tice provide APNs with opportunities to contribute to a culture of research. Early research experience as a team member helps to build skills needed to become a team leader. To maximize skills in the research process, APNs must be prepared to expend concentrated effort, actively participate in the process, show initiative, and lead teams.

FROM APPLYING TO CONDUCTING RESEARCH: STEPS ALONG THE WAY

care practice APNs (AHRQ, 2012). ftrough this net-	 	

work, currently known as the American Association of


Examples of Comparative DatabasesNational Database of Nurse Quality Indicators https://nursingandndnqi.weebly.com/ndnqi
   -indicators.html Hospital Compare
https://www.medicare.gov/hospitalcompare
/search.html?
Get with the Guidelines
https://www.heart.org/en/professional/quality
-improvement
APNs’ academic preparation includes how to evalu- ate and conduct research, yet few practicing APNs feel adequately prepared to lead a research project in their practice arena immediately following graduation. How should they begin? ftere are some practical steps to suc- cessfully integrate research competencies into practice. For the research gap to narrow so that an evidence-based scientific approach to care is embraced by nursing staff, the APN must develop a milieu that promotes such a philosophy (Burns, 2010; Duffy et al., 2015; Melnyk et al., 2012). To successfully engineer a scientific milieu in a clinical setting, the APN must use and model behav- iors such as problem-solving, change agency, mentoring, leadership, and collaborating with an interprofessional team (AACN, 2006, 2011).



Problem-Solving and Applying Research to Practice
fte APN is often called on to propose solutions for clin- ical problems, primarily improving a specific outcome. Oddly enough, even when strong evidence supports the use of a different process or procedure, practice change may occur slowly or not at all. One example is the nearly ubiquitous practice of instilling normal saline into en- dotracheal tubes before suctioning. Although evidence continues to strongly suggest that the practice is both in- effective and potentially harmful, it has continued to be common for decades (Makic & Rauen, 2016). Similarly, despite evidence that lidocaine and a nasal vasoconstric- tor effectively reduce discomfort with nasogastric tube insertion, this procedure is not widely incorporated into practice (Solomon & Jurica, 2017). To counteract these entrenched practices, the APN needs a logical yet cre- ative approach to applying evidence or conducting clin- ical research to support the reality that research must be an integral part of everyday practice.
fte APN begins by helping staff nurses understand
the meaning of research-based practice. fte clinician must first be aware of the evidence that exists for a prac- tice and the strength of that science. Professional and regulatory agencies often perform systematic reviews to determine the existing scientific basis for selected practices, especially high-risk procedures or practices. Practice guidelines are developed from these reviews and generally identify the level of scientific evidence for each recommendation from the lowest (i.e., con- sensus statements by professional organizations) to the highest (i.e., meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials [RCTs]). fte decision to implement the guide- lines is made by considering the relevancy of the prac- tice change to the specific population of interest and by considering the potential for unintended consequences that may ensue. Research-based practices may also be re- quired by regulatory agencies, in which case the hospital must comply. APNs are often the individuals charged with implementation. One example is the use of opi- oid analgesics. Health-care agencies must ensure that these medications are ordered judiciously, documented thoroughly, administered correctly, and monitored rig- orously. Another example is the implementation of a new technique that could potentially reduce the rate of

central line–associated bloodstream infections. Once it has been determined that the new technique may pre- vent infections or potentially the development of sep- sis, the APN follows a process to identify and address barriers to implementation, implement the new process, evaluate its effectiveness, and track outcomes. fte risk of a significant adverse outcome heightens scrutiny of the evaluation process. In contrast, implementation of a low-risk intervention, such as the use of new mobility equipment in the place of traditional equipment, may require only periodic audits of clinicians using the prod- ucts with detailed analysis of any adverse events.
When authoritative guidelines do not exist to help
with research-based practice changes, consensus state- ments by professional organizations may be available and are quite helpful. ftese statements are based on system- atic reviews of the available evidence. Similar to guide- lines, the statements help the user understand the level of evidence in order to rate possible practice changes. Other similar resources that may also be referenced are clinical updates or practice alerts. ftese tend to be pub- lished by professional organizations and are generally narrowly focused on a specific practice such as incor- porating chlorhexidine bathing into preoperative care plans or incorporating lung cancer screening protocols into the care of patients who smoke. Finally, a literature review on the topic of interest will help the APN guide clinicians in determining the need for a practice change or for a clinical study to answer the question.
Although some research-based practice changes may
be initiated using existing science, the vast majority of existing practice traditions have little science to validate their efficacy. For example, although the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the World Health Organization (WHO) both recommend specific elements of personal protective equipment (PPE) related to the care of patients requiring respiratory droplet iso- lation, they do not provide direct guidance to the cli- nician regarding the nuances of wearing PPE. Related questions, such as what strategies most effectively reduce fogging of eye protection and diminish the risk of skin injury related to face mask pressure, remain unanswered. In these cases, the design and conduct of a clinical study to determine the answer is a reasonable and expected part of the APN’s role.







   If the APN determines that a clinical study is nec- essary to answer a practice question, the next step is to determine the project feasibility. A well-thought-out, narrowly focused, well-designed study is essential for cli- nician buy-in. In fact, projects, especially first-time proj- ects, should be selected carefully to ensure a “quick win.” More difficult projects can follow as clinicians and the APN become more sophisticated in conducting clinical studies and more confident in each other’s capabilities. To determine the feasibility of a potential clinical study and the likelihood of conducting it, ask yourself the fol- lowing questions:
1. Is the proposed study a topic of interest to the clinicians? Without clinician interest in the topic, the study is unlikely to move forward. In fact, it may be seen as the APN’s project rather than one owned by the unit or clinicians. Success of the project depends on teamwork.
2. Can it be done in a reasonable amount of time? Time is especially important for first-time projects. fte project should be able to be completed in a couple of months or else interest and enthusiasm will di- minish. In a study by Farmer and associates (2017), clinicians in a postanesthesia care unit questioned the best method for obtaining a point-of-care blood glucose level. ftey were interested in the accuracy and comfort level of using an alternative site (palm of the hand) as compared to the traditional finger- tip. Given access to data on the number of blood glucose levels drawn in a month, they were able to

estimate the number of point-of-care tests to be per- formed in a month and knew that they would be able to complete their study in a few months. With the relatively short data-collection period, interest in the study stayed high throughout.
3. Can the data be collected in the course of a clinical day? Although qualitative studies are important to practice and are attractive to nurses, they are often time-consuming and difficult to accomplish in a busy clinical setting. Quantitative studies, on the other hand, are easier to accomplish. APNs are ac- customed to collecting data. If the study is focused on a clinical problem, such as the point-of-care blood glucose study noted previously, much of the data collection can be accomplished in the course of providing patient care and easily integrated into practice. In addition, data that are routinely col- lected may also contribute to evaluating nursing in- terventions; when aggregated and analyzed, they can help establish best practices (Blonde et al., 2018). Utilizing the electronic health record (EHR) can help to facilitate data collection in a timely manner because most elements of patient care are already documented and can be integrated into reports for analysis. Being mindful of potential missing data points and the numerous variations on searchable terms, APNs can incorporate EHR data retrieval into the data-collection process.
4. Will the study require informed consent? Studies that
measure the effect of an intervention or practice or that challenge an existing policy or established prac- tice standard require informed consent from partic- ipants. From a practical perspective, it is desirable, especially for beginning APN researchers, to design studies that do not require consent. fte time that practicing clinicians must spend to obtain consent is often beyond that reasonably taken from normal care responsibilities and may be especially compli- cated if the patient is unable to give consent and the family must be approached. Studies that do not re- quire informed consent are relatively common and are better choices for beginning APN researchers.
5. Will the study require funding? Many clinical proj-
ects, such as the point-of-care blood glucose exam- ple, do not require a funding source. Supplies are often those used in the course of patient care, and



complex analyses are rarely necessary. However, some studies may require financial support, and this should be considered before beginning. If an institutional or unit budget is not available for such support, other avenues may be explored.
   Small amounts of money are fairly easy to obtain, but they require time and energy to acquire. Examples include funding sources such as institutional grants or small-project monies ($100 to $500) provided by pro- fessional organizations. When Letzkus and colleagues (2020), wanted to study the safest and most effective rate for the administration of platelets to pediatric oncology patients, they applied for and obtained funding from the DAISY Foundation. Nonprofit foundations such as DAISY, which support and honor nurses, can also be explored as funding sources if the project aligns with the foundation’s mission.
Additionally, government agencies often provide
larger dollar grant funding. Government grant applica- tions must typically follow strict guidelines. Adhering to the required content and structure of writing and apply- ing for these grants is essential to successfully obtaining funds. Prior to applying, be sure to identify the insti- tutional structure(s) that will support the management of the grant and its funds need should the application be successful. Collaborating with an experienced grant writer is an excellent idea if you are considering a larger grant award. Some common sources of research funding are presented in Box 16.2.
   Another potential source of funding for clinical re- search may be unit funds; the manager or administrator should be consulted ahead of time to determine if this is a viable solution. To ensure feasibility, funding for se- lected elements of the project should be considered early in the project’s development and design. It is desirable to have funds for needed statistical analyses. Collaborat- ing with a statistician from the initial development of the study enhances the strength of the study by assessing linkages between the question, data, and analyses.
6. Are there barriers to evidence use? Some cultures resist the APN’s efforts to implement practice changes. Gaining administrative support helps to reduce barriers and obtain necessary resources (Hill, 2020; Quatrara et al., 2017). It may be useful to develop a strategy for delivering findings in a less formal



     Potential Grant Funding Sources
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
https://www.ahrq.gov/funding/fund-opps/index
.html
American Nurses Foundation (ANF)
https://www.nursingworld.org/foundation
  /programs/nursing-research-grants/ National Institutes of Health (NIH) https://www.nih.gov/grants-funding
National Institutes of Nursing Research (NINR) https://www.ninr.nih.gov/researchandfunding
/desp/oep/fundingopportunities
National League of Nursing, Nursing Education Research Grants
http://www.nln.org/professional-development
-programs/grants-and-scholarships/nursing
-education-research-grants
Sigma fteta Tau International Nursing Honor Society
https://www.sigmanursing.org/advance-elevate
/research/research-grants
manner. Staff members often prefer one-on-one coaching, in-services, staff meetings, and learning methods that are less intimidating. Involving others from the start also helps to reinforce the premise that the work does not belong solely to the APN. Regardless of the APN’s best efforts, it is important to remember that not everyone is successful in im- plementing research findings in all settings all the time. APNs can enhance the buy-in of clinicians by meeting their learning needs early on, exchanging expertise, and stimulating participation throughout the study (Burns, 2010). ftese and other successful strategies are discussed later in this chapter.

Mentoring and Leadership
To encourage staff to understand that research is a nec- essary part of their daily work, the APN’s ability to men- tor is vital. Although this statement seems obvious, it is



far from being so. Many individuals are good at envi- sioning projects, and some may even inspire others to participate. Unfortunately, a less appreciated behavior linked with success is the APN’s ability to ensure that all steps of the project are fully completed in the prede- termined manner. ftis is hard work and often requires dedicated determination to support, lead, and mentor others throughout the course of the project. Past per- formance speaks to this ability, and it is essential that the APN be able to realistically assess their previous ex- perience in completing projects and mentoring others. An APN who is working with clinicians on a clinical or service line project, for example, should not assume that participating individuals can independently accomplish the assigned tasks. Clinicians working on the project may have selected a project to learn how to do clinical research. However, they may lack experience in some of the steps of the process such as how to accomplish a liter- ature review. fte APN needs to anticipate this and help the individual accomplish the review. ftis one-on-one teaching is important to demystify the process, eliminate barriers, move the process along, and ensure success. fte support and teaching provided by the APN also boosts their credibility and ensures the development of others.
fte APN’s enthusiastic leadership goes a long way to
making others excited about the process of research. ftis leadership extends to all aspects of the clinical project from problem identification to application. Most im- portant, the project should be fun. As noted previously, many clinicians feel that research is intimidating, and they are fearful of embarking on a study. Bringing enjoy- ment to the process helps to eliminate the fear of doing research.

Change Agency and a Systems Approach
Perhaps one of the most important skills of the APN is the ability to navigate the practice environment. ftis understanding of the system is essential if appropriate changes are to be implemented. fte APN must be able to identify the need to change an existing practice and the likely effect of this practice change. fte APN’s clin- ical knowledge and understanding of how to get some- thing done in the designated clinical environment helps ensure that high quality is maintained. To that end, the APN has a responsibility to the institution to evaluate

clinical and system-focused initiatives. In fact, these ini- tiatives may be another way of demonstrating that re- search is part of what we do, and they are essential to the development of a widespread scientific approach to prac- tice. An example might be an initiative to implement a specific care protocol derived from a published RCT. fte protocol may well be research-based and warranted; however, implementation without careful consideration of existing processes of care and barriers to change could result in negative unanticipated outcomes. fte APN’s knowledge of the processes of care and understanding of how best to apply and monitor adherence to the new protocol is essential to evaluate its effect on the outcome of interest. ftis kind of scientific approach to the prob- lem proactively avoids variations in practice that nega- tively affect clinical and financial metrics.
In some cases, data do not exist to guide system
changes. fte role of the APN is to help evaluate the outcomes associated with the system change so that the initiatives can be adapted as needed or to maintain and sustain positive outcomes. ftese kinds of projects often fall under the title of quality improvement (QI). Although slightly different from research studies in that they are rarely as rigorous in design or methods, they are popular projects for APNs. An example is a project designed to determine if the implementation of an en- hanced recovery (ER) protocol improved the outcomes of patients undergoing elective colorectal surgery. Clini- cians and the institution were interested in the project because of the desire to improve clinical and financial outcomes for this patient population. An interdisciplin- ary team implemented an ER protocol that included preoperative counseling with patient participation, an- algesia with the avoidance of intravenous opioids, spe- cific intraoperative fluid management, a preoperative carbohydrate loading diet, and immediate postoperative ambulation (fteile et al., 2015). fte project resulted in the outcomes desired—improved patient satisfaction and reductions in length of stay, complications, and cost for elective colorectal patients at the institution. Because of this project, the institution adopted the protocol as the standard of care, and there is continued incentive to replicate it in other surgical populations.
fte behaviors discussed previously, in addition to
the attributes of the APN, determine the effectiveness of the APN in making research come to life in a clinical



setting. However, barriers to success do exist. fte most commonly cited barriers to the development of a re- search milieu include limited clinical access to patient populations, lack of buy-in from clinicians, lack of ad- ministrative support, limited resources (i.e., time and money), and difficulty completing the study and pub- lishing the results. Barriers and their possible solutions are addressed in the following section.

Removing Barriers to APN Research Activities
Although APNs were expected to apply research to practice in the past, actual conducting clinical research has not been strongly emphasized. ftis is changing as regulatory agencies, such as fte Joint Commission (TJC), and professional groups, such as the American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC) and the Amer- ican Association of Critical-Care Nurses (AACN), reward hospitals for demonstrating research-based nursing practice, including conducting research as part of  their  expectation  for  recognition.  ftese  organiza- tions have identified that clinical outcomes improve when nursing care is science-based (ANCC, 2011; AACN, 2019; Johantgen et al., 2017). In addition, the presence of an active, formal nursing research program demonstrates the hospital’s commitment to and sup- port of scientific inquiry.
APN involvement in clinical research is critical to the
profession. To that end, it is necessary to remove barriers and facilitate the role of the APN in conducting clini- cally relevant research activities.
Clinical Access and Clinician Buy-In
Selecting a patient population to study is not generally difficult; the choice is driven by the research question and the practice or service setting in which the APN works. It is important to remember that for clinical research to become a useful and real part of everyday practice, the research must be relevant. Greater buy-in is achieved when there is harmony and involved participants share a mutual interest. APNs can foster a spirit of inquiry and reinforce the idea that research is a journey. fte APN acts as a clinical intermediary to influence practice changes by sharing research through clinical rounds, in staff education, and by demonstrating practice changes.

Using their mentoring and coaching skills, APNs can bridge the gap between theory and clinical practice.
   Clinical access may be denied (or just covertly dis- couraged) if the research is not seen as important to the clinical practice. When clinicians are involved and buy-in is high, access to patients is rarely an issue. Unfortunately, APNs who seek to pursue only their own research interests will quickly find that clinicians may not be supportive.
   Strategies to encourage a research philosophy and buy-in include traditional solutions such as the establish- ment of journal clubs. In reality, journal clubs tend to last for only a few meetings, may be poorly attended because they are often held away from the clinical setting, and are often less than inspiring. Although they may be one way of infusing a research focus into practice, they are rarely the complete answer. Instead, the evaluation of scientific articles may be more acceptable and interesting if used in conjunction with a clinical question that emerges from a practice committee meeting or clinical dilemma.
   As previously noted, clinicians are interested in re- search that has direct application to their practice (Chulay, 2006; Gawlinski & Miller, 2011; Unertl et al., 2018). An evaluation done by staff nurses in a cardiothoracic intensive care unit on the implementation of unit-based research teams revealed value in contributing to nursing research and improving patient outcomes (Gawlinski & Miller, 2011). fte clinicians recognized the importance their research had on their clinical practice.
Administrative Support
Administrative support for clinical projects (espe- cially those requiring clinician time or money) often hinges on the APN’s previous accomplishments. Gen- erally, many of the same attributes (e.g., perseverance, follow-through, and attention to detail) are required for any project to be successful. In addition, commu- nication is essential for a true partnership built on trust and mutual respect between the administrator and the APN. Updates on the project’s progress, identification of barriers to the process, and plans for dissemination of the results help ensure administrative understanding and future support.
It is helpful for the APN and administrator to have a dis-
cussion early in the partnership about the goals for devel- oping a research-based practice. ftrough the conversation,



a logical and sequential set of steps can be designed to ensure the APN’s success. It is important as well that the APN and administrator agree on the program philosophy and define the boundaries for the program (e.g., support of various aspects such as meeting times, statistical analy- ses, and financial or educational support for clinicians who present study results outside the institution).
   Fueled in part by the growth in the Magnet Recogni- tion Program (AANC, 2011; ANCC, 2019), more organi- zations are establishing dedicated clinical nursing research roles. A more formal framework for research enhances the APN’s opportunity to lead or participate in some aspect of clinical research. fte more formal framework may also lead to including research as an element in the performance appraisal for staff at designated points in a clinical ladder.
Time and Money
In today’s practice environment, it is sometimes difficult to find time to do research or even to evaluate existing research to determine whether practice changes should be implemented. fte refrains “We’re too busy” or “We’ll do it when we have more time” are common.
  fte APN’s ability to demonstrate how research ac- tivities can be accomplished as part of a normal clinical day is essential to ensuring success. In fact, as discussed previously, when considering the feasibility of a research project or practice change, first conduct a realistic as- sessment of the clinical environment. Feasibility includes the cost of the project and the potential financial out- comes associated with it. Both feasibility and financial solutions were addressed previously in this chapter.

COMPLETING THE RESEARCH (“CLOSING THE LOOP”)

A mark of true scholarship is to “close the loop” by pre- senting the outcomes of the research project to key stake- holders. In some cases, this means providing an update in the form of a study summary at the unit level or, if generalizable, to other patient care areas. fte outcomes may also be presented at local or national meetings and may be published as well. Unfortunately, many APNs accomplish wonderful research-based practice changes or research studies, but they do not disseminate the results.
  
Learning how to present the material is an import- ant skill that improves with practice. Initially, the APN should seek a mentor who is experienced in presenting and publishing. Although writing and presenting skills may be difficult for the beginning APN, the importance of working to improve these skills cannot be understated. Institutions interested in presentation and publication of APN-related research activities are wise to consider built-in supports such as individuals who have publica- tion experience to help clinicians learn how to present and publish their work (Duffy et al., 2016; Migliore et al., 2020). ftis specific kind of mentoring is helpful to teach APNs these scholarly activities. In addition, such a supportive commitment is a practical means of ensuring that the work is disseminated and that the APN and institution are recognized for these contributions to nursing knowledge.

CLINICAL RESEARCH IN ACTION


APNs are obligated to contribute to the development of new knowledge and safer practice through research. APNs also use research to improve the quality and re- duce the cost of care. fte scope of clinical research may vary but the requirement for doing research is inherent in the role.
  It is essential for APNs to start slow and small in clinical research; an individual practice setting is appro- priate at the early stages. Subsequent projects may cross practice settings, and, finally, larger-scale institutional research projects can be initiated. Regardless of the level, successful research studies require the support of the in- stitution, good communication, and a team approach.
   fte examples that follow illustrate key components of successful clinical research.

An Evaluation of Risk Factor for Extubation Failure in Surgical Patients in Intensive Care
An acute care nurse practitioner and several of her team- mates were concerned about reintubations following extubation from mechanical ventilation in the surgical intensive care unit (SICU). She noted that few stud- ies investigated reintubation in the SICU population.



Additional research was needed. She pulled together a team from across the institution to assist with the iden- tification of risk factors that predict extubation failure in nontrauma surgical postoperative intensive care patients. Using the resources of the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program data- base and mining the EHRs of a sample of surgical patients admitted postoperatively to a SICU with an endotracheal tube in place, the acute care nurse practitioner and her study team evaluated the clinical variables in the 24 hours preceding extubation. ftey identified that an increasing respiratory rate in the 24 hours preceding extubation sig- nificantly predicted extubation failure. She is using this research to educate nurses and other health-care team members in extubation planning to improve unplanned reintubation rates in SICU patients (Deivert et al., 2019).

Home Delivery of Intravenous Chemotherapy in Children With Cancer
Pediatric oncology nurse practitioners were trained and competent to deliver IV chemotherapy in the home setting. Yet, all care was being provided in the hospital setting. ftrough a pilot study, the nurse practitioners determined if, within a population of children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, chemotherapy could be safely administered at home while increasing quality of life for the child and decreasing the social burden on the family. fte results indicated that chemotherapy could be safely administered at home by highly qualified nurse practitioners. Starting small with a pilot study, the nurse practitioners were able to demonstrate the value of their role in enhancing the well-being of patients and families (Kok et al., 2019).

Educational Intervention to Improve Delirium Recognition by Nurses
A critical care clinical nurse specialist (CNS) with a long-standing passion for reducing delirium was eager to identify the best practice for training staff in the appli- cation of the Confusion Assessment Method for the In- tensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU). Her literature findings were minimal. fterefore, she teamed up with a mentor to evaluate the effectiveness of a multimodal educational intervention for nurses in the medical intensive care unit

to improve their knowledge of and skills regarding delir- ium and delirium recognition. fte CNS was a respected unit leader and actively engaged in unit orientations and trainings. She was able to leverage her expertise and role to implement a structured multimodal education inter- vention in the medical intensive care unit. With admin- istrative support and clinician buy-in, she successfully completed the quasi-experimental study, demonstrating an increase in overall knowledge and an enhanced ability to appropriately implement the CAM-ICU (Blevins & DeGennaro, 2018).

Feasibility of Diabetes Self-Management Telehealth Education for Older Adults During Transitions in Care
In this study, faculty and clinical APNs teamed-up to perform a feasibility study. Feasibility studies are well suited for the clinical setting where new processes are often being proposed. fte study explored the integra- tion of telehealth-delivered diabetes self-management education and support (DSMES) for older adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus following hospital discharge. fte implementation of the intervention included a sin- gle face-to-face home visit and weekly virtual follow-up meetings. Surveys and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels were used to evaluate the success of the intervention. Older adult participants who fully participated in the DSMES increased their diabetes knowledge scores and decreased their HbA1c values. fte study points to the value of the expanding role of telehealth in optimizing care and, through feasibility, assesses the reasonableness of the processes required to implement the intervention (Whitehouse et al., 2020).




SUMMARY

Excellence in advanced practice depends on creating sus- tainable and active research in the practice setting. For the APN to guide and shape practice, decisions about best prac- tices and procedures must be based on research seamlessly integrated into practice. Whether we serve as consumers

of research by reading and applying results of scientific re- ports or actually conduct studies to determine the answer to a clinical question, research must be evident as an im- portant element of everyday practice. fte role of the APN as a research mentor and leader is essential to ensure that evidence-based practice (EBP) is integrated and widespread. Only then will research truly be “part of what we do.”















   Holism and Complementary and Integrative Health Approaches
for the Advanced Practice Nurse
Carole Ann Drick



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Discuss the importance of extraordinary self-care as foundational for safe, effective, healthy advanced practice nursing (APN) in the “New Normal.”
• Realize the timely importance of the holistic framework as an expanded theoretical
base for APN.
• Evaluate the integration of complementary and integrative health (CIH) approaches into health care.
• Explain the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health
(NCCIH) categorization of holistic approaches.
• Discuss the effect of health-care reform on the future of holistic nursing.
• Explain nurse coaching as an important adjunct to APN.
• Support the need for expanding research in CIH.
• Demonstrate the supportive relationship between advanced practice holistic nursing and CIH.
• Distinguish the advanced practice holistic nursing practice issues and CIH.
• Discuss holistic nursing’s perspective on ethical issues as clarifying for advanced practice nurses.


277



INTRODUCTION

fte COVID-19 pandemic has changed the face of health care as we know it. With limited availability to health- care providers for minor illnesses and surgeries, consum- ers have turned in increasing numbers to the Internet for information on natural remedies to promote health and to cure or alleviate illness. Health care has changed, and there is no returning to normal. Rather, there is a “new normal” that currently has amorphous changing guide- lines. As nurses, we are expected to “keep calm and carry on.” We are heralded as heroes by patients and their fam- ilies when in reality we are simply doing our jobs. ftis is a time when, yes, we can rise to the occasion; but also it is imperative that we remain calm and make sound deci- sions. In order to do that, we must engage in extraordi- nary self-care. fterefore, the first section of this chapter is dedicated to your health and well-being as the APN.

WHAT IS EXTRAORDINARY SELF-CARE?

Extraordinary times call for extraordinary actions. Self- care is no exception. Vital in the years to come, extraordi- nary self-care is foundational to ensure the most effective, supportive nursing care based on clear decisions made at the bedside and in the boardroom. To live and work with the risk of COVID-19 for the near future and probably longer, we must learn how to keep our immune systems strong. Traditional self-care practices include diet, exer- cise, sleep, smoking cessation, and limited use of alcohol. Holistic self-care goes beyond traditional self-care. See Box 17.1.
   Extraordinary self-care incorporates and goes beyond holistic self-care and includes sleep, warmth, self- reflection, and Presence as the base. All the extraordinary



Extraordinary Self-Care Essential ElementsGet an extra hour of sleep. Keep warm.
Practice daily self-reflection. Practice Presence.
self-care measures are important. Some are easier to in- corporate than others; however, it is important to work on all four every day. Work on improving each area rather than being perfect. ftese are lifelong strategies that will serve you very well. See Box 17.2.
   Sleep appears simple—get an extra hour of sleep each night. Recommended is 7 to 8 hours, which you already know. So, how is that working for you?! Sleep is founda- tional to every other bodily function. Make a goal to get an extra hour of sleep. It will do wonders for you, so take it in small steps. Consider beginning with going to bed 15 minutes earlier. Do this for a couple of weeks until it becomes part of your routine. It is important to go to bed and get up at the same time each day. Our bodies love routine and consistency. So why is adequate sleep so important?
• During sleep, your heart gets a rest, and your blood pressure drops. With less sleep, your blood pressure stays elevated longer.
• If you exercise, your muscles have time to repair
during sleep.
• With enough sleep, it’s easier to say no to sweets. Without restorative sleep, you are more likely to be influenced by “hunger hormones.”
• Your immune system is stronger when you get ade-
quate sleep.
• With enough sleep, your brain functions better, and you think more clearly; therefore, decision making is

clearer and easier.
• In essence without sufficient sleep, your energy goes to keeping you awake, taking energy from other functions in order to keep you going. ftis is all basic physiology.
Warmth is crucial. Do not allow yourself to be even
a little cool. Carry a sweater. Do not sit under the air



conditioner or have cool air blowing directly over you. Move! When you are cold, your energy goes to keeping your body warm and takes energy away from other func- tions, especially thinking clearly. ftat’s basic physiology again.
   Self-reflection is a turning inward to examine one’s thoughts, values, beliefs, experiences, behaviors, and inner wisdom. It integrates critical thinking and compas- sion. Self-reflection values both the self and one’s calling to nursing as a life’s purpose and a way of being in the world. Take time each day to STOP for 5 to 10 minutes in a quiet place and reflect on how your day went. What went well? How could you improve events that did not go well? Having a journal dedicated to the things that went well, or “wins,” can be very powerful. It is not a gripe journal. It will soon become apparent that in every situ- ation there is an opportunity to learn and change your approach. ftese insights will deepen your compassion for yourself and give you tools to thrive as an APN.
Presence, the foundation of extraordinary self-care, is
the essential state or core of healing. It is approaching an individual or the self in a way that respects and hon- ors their essence (American Nurses Association [ANA] & American Holistic Nurses Association [AHNA], 2019, p. 120). Presence is being here now with your full attention. By focusing on your breath, you can be here, becoming more alert and aware. Your mind becomes quiet. Try it. Now . . .
   Did you do it? Or are you reading to get to the end of the chapter? If you kept reading, you are missing the

present moment and all the richness it holds. Go back. Reread this paragraph and do the mini exercise. It can be the most powerful tool you have—if you use it. When you focus on your breathing, you are here now because you can only breathe in the present moment.

INTEGRATIVE HEALTH CARE


Integrative health care involves the coordination of conventional and complementary approaches to health and healing. fte change in terminology from alterna- tive medicine to the larger umbrella of integrative health supports the role of holistic nurses, who have long been champions of integrating both approaches (AHNA, 2016). fte National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) has developed useful defi- nitions of complementary health approaches; they are listed in Table 17.1.
   Professionally, it is important for nurses to acknowl- edge and use the new titles for the different agencies along with the new definitions. ftis recognizes health care’s forward movement into a more holistic approach. For advanced nursing, the terms complementary and holistic are preferable because both imply a philosophi- cal framework that is greater than the modality. Within the larger framework of health care, the term integrative health is more appropriate. Some of the data presented in this chapter reflect practice and research literature before the name change and redefinitions. In this instance, the


   TaBle 17.1	
Terms Associated With CIHA and Holistic Nursing

TermDefinitionSourceHolistic careRefers to approaches and interventions that address the needs of the whole person: body, mind, emotion, and spirit.AHNA Position on the Role of Nurses in the Practice
of Complementary and Integrative Health Approaches (CIHA) (2016)Complementary approachesAs a practice, used together with conventional medicine.National Center for Complementary and Integrative HealthAlternative approachesRefers to a nonmainstream practice used in place of conventional medicine.National Center for Complementary and Integrative HealthIntegrative health careInvolves the coordination of conventional and complementary approaches.National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health


term complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) are occasionally used. Note, however, that CAM implies an emphasis on approaches rather than on a philosophy. In this chapter, the terms CAM, complementary, and holism reflect “the integrative nature of nursing practice with the term integrative health reflecting the inclusion of complementary approaches into the biomedical model of care.” NOTE: fte term approach now replaces modal- ities, treatments, or therapies. We can hope that this is the first step in the transformation of the Western biomed- ical health-care system into one grounded in a holistic, caring philosophy.
Historically, nurses have been at the forefront of
developing holistic care and CIH approaches. Florence Nightingale’s (1859/1969) early statistical and clini- cal work taught the health-care community about the importance of environment and spirituality on health and healing. Nightingale believed that nurses put the patients in the best condition for nature to act on them and that all disease is essentially a “reparative process.” She argued for a comprehensive approach that empha- sized cleanliness, fresh air, color, fresh food, and the pres- ence of pets to aid healing in the sick and injured. She also emphasized spirituality.
   fte holistic, bio-psycho-social-spiritual-cultural model has been introduced in fundamental nursing texts. Nurses value the role of the interpersonal relationships in their healing work and incorporate the role of environmental influences and culture. Nurses have been pioneers in the integration of comfort-enhancing mind-body approaches such as prepared childbirth education, preparation for surgery programs, and the use of gentle massage. Relax- ation, imagery, fostering a therapeutic relationship and communication, and the development of therapeutic touch (TT) and healing touch (HT) have been part of our holistic nursing lexicon for decades. To promote comfort and enhance healing, nurses in many hospitals and outpa- tient settings now practice Reiki, another “subtle energy” approach.
fte AHNA began in 1981 when burnout, nursing
shortages, poor pay, and nonrecognition were rampant. Focusing on the importance of self-care and self-worth, this association has stood the test of time and is a major influencer of the ANA and other national associations and institutions, including Veterans hospitals. With similar work situations present in nursing today, AHNA

is becoming increasingly popular and powerful in our profession.
   As the nurse practitioner (NP) movement developed in the late 1960s, nurses became more “medicalized” and specialized in both focus and practice. Consequently, many nurses may be marginally prepared or unprepared to meet their patients’ holistic needs. APNs, aware that they are focusing exclusively on the medical aspects of their practice, have the opportunity to rediscover the richness of holistic approaches that also promote more job satisfaction and less burnout.
   As APNs became more specialized in developing group-specific knowledge and skills (e.g., children, women, and mental health clients), they became preoc- cupied with parts of the person or group but not the integral whole (Erickson, 2007). In response, Kubsch and colleagues (2007) advocated for a paradigm shift from a reductionist frame of reference (i.e., our current allopathic health-care system and some NP programs) to one that reflects a holistic philosophy that includes complementary approaches. In such a shift, health is synonymous with well-being. Tension, however, contin- ues to exist between physicians, nurses, and consumers as this paradigm shift is occurring. fte tension is further exacerbated in the attempt to balance client satisfaction with the demands for cost containment and institutional practitioner productivity quotas.

HOLISM AND HOLISTIC NURSING


Many nurses incorporate complementary and inte- grative health approaches (CIHA) in their practice. According to the AHNA, holistic nurses recognize two views of holism: (a) identifying the interrelationships of the bio-psycho-social-spiritual dimensions of the person; that is, recognizing that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts; and (b) understanding the individual as a unitary whole in mutual process with the environment. Both views are valued, and the goals of nursing can be achieved within either framework (AHNA, 2019). Either holistic philosophy is congruent with the theoret- ical base for the advanced nursing practice of CIHA and a holistic nursing practice. ftis holistic emphasis is the framework for this chapter. All approaches (complemen- tary or conventional), therefore, have two components:



the approach itself and the holistic focus of the prac- titioner. APNs need to balance their theoretical and philosophical foundations for practice with approaches that support and enhance the whole person. Holism is rich in nursing theorists including Rogers, Parse, Orem, Erickson, Dossey, and Watson. ftese foundation theories are seen as a very important part of the science and art of holistic nursing.
   Healing is basic to nursing practice and is a term often used in conjunction with holistic nursing and comple- mentary approaches. Seen as a process rather than an endpoint, holism may include cure; however, it implies recovery from a state of feeling shattered or fragmented into one of new or restored wholeness. fte person becomes aware of a shift in his or her perception of a life experience, finds new meaning, and often develops new behaviors (Zahourek, 2009).
   “Holistic nursing interventions have always originated from the perspective of the person, community or family” (p. 215), which suggests that holistic nursing can help transform today’s health-care system. Holistic nursing is “all nursing practice that has healing the whole per- son as its goal” (ANA & AHNA, 2019). Holistic nurses become therapeutic partners to strengthen human responses by facilitating the healing process and promot- ing wholeness.

About the American Holistic Nurses Association
Holistic nursing focuses on integrating traditional, complementary, and holistic approaches to improve the physical, mental, emotional, and relational health of the whole person. It fosters the nurse’s self-care, self-reflection, and presence to enhance quality person- centered care. At its founding in 1981, the AHNA adopted as its primary mission the advancement of holistic nursing care by increasing awareness and promot- ing education as well as personal community-building among nurses, other health-care professionals, and the public. ftis professional specialty nursing membership organization is the definitive voice for holistic nursing for registered nurses (RNs) and other holistic health-care professionals around the world. Holistic nursing is seen as a calling that comes from deep within. It is our life’s purpose. See Box 17.3.



     Holistic Nursing Calls Us . . .
To honor our place in the sacred circle of life.
To live from awareness that all things are connected.
To appreciate that how we care for ourselves affects others in the circle.
   In 2007, the AHNA was recognized by the ANA as a specialty with its own Scope and Standards of Practice (ANA & AHNA, 2007). As a specialty, it is like all other nursing specialties with specific knowledge and theoret- ical base. ftere is one addition. Holistic nursing can be practiced across all disciplines and specialties. Now in its third edition (ANA & AHNA, 2019), the AHNA Scope and Standards of Practice is setting the bar for professional nursing with person-centered care.
   As a specialty, holistic nursing is based on a phi- losophy; a body of knowledge; and an advanced set of nursing skills applied to practice that recognize the totality of the human being, the interconnectedness of body, mind, spirit, energy, social/cultural relation- ship context, and environment. Philosophically, it is a worldview and not just an approach. Practice is drawn from various healing systems, incorporates CIHA, and, through unconditional presence and intention, creates healing environments. Self-care and self-responsibility are essential components. Holistic nursing approaches may be integrated into any conventional practice.
For decades before 1981, nurses used holistic
approaches that are presently clearly defined by the NCCIH. Some of these approaches include relaxation, art, guided imagery, movement, massage, meditation, music, sound therapy, and prayer. Nurses also incorpo- rate subtle energy therapies such as TT, HT, aromather- apy, and Reiki in their work in various clinical settings (Dossey & Keegan, 2016).

National Holistic Nurse Certification
National certification as a holistic nurse is offered by the American Holistic Nurses Credentialing Corporation (AHNCC). ftis certification opens doors for nurses practicing in the rapidly growing field of holistic and



integrative health care. Numerous graduates of this pro- gram share that this certification was a deciding factor in their receiving the position or promotion they were seeking. ftere are four levels of certification as a holistic nurse. fte first level is Holistic Nurse Board Certified (HN-BC), offered to all RNs. fte second level is Holistic Nurse Baccalaureate (HNB-BC). fte third level is Ad- vanced Holistic Nurse (AHN-BC), offered to RNs with a graduate degree. fte fourth level is Advanced Practice Holistic Nurse (APHN-BC) with prescriptive authority. More specific information about the two advanced levels can be found from the American Holistic Nursing Cer- tification Corporation.

MILESTONES IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF COMPLEMENTARY AND INTEGRATIVE HEALTH

fte research base for complementary health approaches continues to grow. fte NCCIH was founded at the National Institutes for Health (NIH) in 1999 as an out- growth of the Office of Alternative Medicine. Its mission is to define, through rigorous scientific investigation, the usefulness and safety of CIH interventions and their roles in improving health and health care (NCCIH, 2016a).
  fte most current (2012) National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) and continuing studies support that approximately 33.2% of adult Americans use comple- mentary health approaches (NCCIH, 2016b). NCCIH funds research in more than 260 institutions and supplies information for practitioners, researchers, and consumers, including Internet-accessible information sheets; up-to- date research compilations on approaches and supple- ments; research blogs; entries on Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube; and a continuing education series and outreach to health-care providers through a dedicated portal.
   fte NCCIH simplified its categorization of CIHA to three subgroups: natural products, body-mind practices, and other, for approaches that do not fit exclusively into one of the two larger subgroups (NCCIH, 2016a). fte classification system is shown in Box 17.4. ftis classifi- cation system will not satisfy many nurses who practice TT, HT, Reiki, or other energy therapies because these practices have been omitted in the examples. Likewise, the term energy therapies has been omitted.



     NCCIH Classification System
Natural Products
A variety of products, such as herbs (aka botan- icals), vitamins and minerals, and probiotics.
Mind and Body Practices
A large and diverse group of procedures or tech- niques administered or taught by a trained practitioner or teacher.
Other Complementary Health Approaches
Approaches that do not neatly fit into either of the above two groups, such as traditional healers, Ayurvedic medicine, traditional Chinese medi- cine, homeopathy, and naturopathy.Adapted from the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. Retrieved from https://www.nccih.nih.gov.


   Accordingtonow-datedWebsites(National Centerfor Complementary and Alternative Medicine [NCCAM]), “some CAM practices involve manipulation of vari- ous energy fields to affect health. Such fields may be characterized as veritable (measurable) or putative (yet to be measured).” Practices based on veritable forms of energy include those involving electromagnetic fields (e.g., magnet therapy and light therapy). Practices based on putative energy fields (also called biofields) generally reflect the concept that human beings are infused with subtle forms of energy. Such interventions include Qigong, Reiki, TT, and HT. In these modali- ties, practitioners use intent in transmitting a universal energy to a person, either from a distance or by placing their hands on or near that person.
Unfortunately, this extensive explanation is no
longer available on the Web site as of 2016. However, there is now a much more extensive in-depth research and publication listing. Possible explanations for this change may include the following: What was once in need of explanation is now becoming more com- monplace and accepted, or we’ve taken a giant step backward by eliminating energy fields and ignoring quantum physics.



  Some complementary health approaches are grounded in culture and tradition such as Ayurveda. Other approaches are original nursing interventions (TT and HT). Complementary health approaches continue to change as a specific practice becomes more standardized because research supports its mechanism, efficacy, or safety. Acupuncture, acupressure, aromatherapy, biofeedback, chiropractic care, diet, exercise, guided imagery, some herbal medicines, some homeopathic remedies, humor, hypnosis, magnets, massage, meditation, music, prayer, and relaxation techniques all currently enjoy a substan- tial research base; reports of these approaches can be found on the NCCIH Web site (https://nccih.nih.gov
/health). See Box 17.5 for the variety of resources avail-
able through NCCIH. See Box 17.6 for NCCIH contact information.

NCCIH 2021–2026 Strategic Plan
During 2020, the NCCIH developed its fifth strategic plan, which will guide the center’s research efforts and priorities over the next 5 years (Fiscal Years 2021–2026). ftroughout the yearlong strategic planning process, the NCCIH is seeking input from its stakeholders through many different channels. ftey particularly encourage input from the public and are offering several oppor- tunities for people to contribute their thoughts and feedback. A summary of the 2016–2020 strategic plan, Exploring the Science of Complementary and Integrative



NCCIH Resources in the Public Domain• Complementary, Alternative, and Integrative Health: What’s in a Name?
• Dietary and Herbal Supplements
• Herbs at a Glance
• Statistics on Use
• Safety  Information
• Health Topics A–Z
• Clinical Trials and Research
• Grants and FundingAdapted from the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Web site: https://www.nccih.nih.gov.



NCCIH Information: Clearing House,
     Connecting, and Treatment
• NCCIH Clearing House—information about NCCIH or any complementary health approach.
Phone: 888-644-6226
FAX: 866-464-3616
e-mail: info@nccih.nih.gov
Written: NCCIH Clearinghouse, PO Box 7923, Gaithersburg, MD, 20898-7923
• Connect with Us: e-mail, follow on social media, live chats with experts, or subscribe to a variety of e-mail updates.
• Treatment Information: Relabeled and available
under Health Topics A–Z and listed by condi- tion. Available at https://nccih.nih.gov/health
/atoz.htm.Adapted from the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Web site: https://www.nccih.nih.gov.



Health: Fourth Strategic Plan 2016–2020, is presented in Table 17.2 to enable the reader to have a background when the reader reviews the new strategic plan for 2021–2026. Within this 2016–2020 strategic plan are five goals with two to three strategic objectives under- neath each one. ftree overarching goals have particular relevance for APNs.

THE COACHING MOVEMENT


Coaching roles in health, wellness, and life have been growing in numbers and across disciplines since the mid-1990s. ftis movement is related to the health- care reform concept of a medical home. In 1967, the American Academy of Pediatrics coined this term, which was originally intended for primary care physicians. fte medical home was seen as the “home base” for health care. Currently, the term has expanded to refer to a multidisci- plinary team whose emphasis is on wellness maintenance and illness prevention in primary care.


   TaBle 17.2	
NCCIH 2016–2020 Overarching Goals Relevant to APNs

Goal 1: Advance Fundamental Science and Methods DevelopmentPeople commonly use complementary health approaches to manage symptoms of diseases and conditions that are difficult to treat such as back or neck pain, arthritic or other musculoskeletal pain, and insomnia. Recent evidence suggests that some comple- mentary health approaches help to mitigate these symptoms; in some cases, they engage innate biological processes involved in pain and emotional management. More research is needed to understand whether and how such interventions augment existing approaches and to identify the related biological mechanisms.Goal 2: Improve Care for Hard-to-Manage SymptomsMany advanced practice practitioners use complementary health approaches such as aromatherapy, meditation, relaxation, movement therapies, or yoga to help motivate people to adopt and sustain healthier lifestyles. Natural products such as dietary supplements or herbs are also used to promote better health. The evidence supports the idea that those who use complementary health approaches may have better health-seeking behaviors.Goal 3: Foster Health Promotion and Disease PreventionNCCIH continues to fully support research that addresses promotion and prevention and provides evidence-based information on the complementary health approaches that support this for both the professional and lay public. A continued realization and emphasis
in the 2016 plan is for research that is applicable to, and generated from, the “real world” of clinical practice. Basic research to study biological processes associated with complementary health approaches will continue. Outcomes research and effectiveness of complementary health approaches in practice is a welcomed and a pertinent addition.

   fte International Council of Nurses and Sigma fteta Tau created the document Coaching in Nursing (Donner & Wheeler, 2009), which established its own scope and competencies and described a relationship between health and wellness coaching and nursing. When coach- ing was first being developed, the word competencies, rather than standards, was chosen to avoid any confusion with ANA standards.
   Hess (2011) defined holistic coaching as “skilled, pur- poseful, results-oriented, and structured relationship- centered interactions with clients by registered nurses for the purpose of promoting the health and well-being of the whole person” (p. 16). Coaching is not therapy or counseling. fte goal is to create healthy behaviors and lifestyle changes, and the relationship offers the opportu- nity to use numerous complementary health approaches as appropriate. Dossey and Luck (2015) developed the theory of integrative nurse coaching.
   Nurse coaching is based on the Holistic Nursing: Scope and Standards of Practice (ANA & AHNA, 2019). Grounded on relationship-based care, the client’s story provides the primary data that facilitates identifying their needs. Coaching does not imply the nurse’s use of

engagement or manipulation for compliance. Advanced coaching skills are not taught in the majority of basic or advanced degree schools. APNs must have excellent communication skills and knowledge to meet the per- son where they are to cocreate a plan of care based on their needs and their desires. ftis cocreation process is an important expansion beyond the medical model of most APN training.
   Nurse coaching offers new opportunities for APNs. In 2016, for the first time, the demand for APNs who specialize in holistic and integrative approaches exceeded the supply (McElligott, 2016). In the traditional APN role, managing both the patient and the disease often takes precedence over whole-person healing and self-care of the patient and the nurse. An APN with coaching certification expands the role’s definition. Nurse coach- ing requires establishing a client–coach relationship, developing client goals, and providing support during the action phase. Nurse coaching aligns with health promo- tion, healing, and prevention strategies for many patient populations, including acute care, ambulatory, and both chronic and palliative care. Further, nurse coaching supports person-centered care and the interdisciplinary




Quadruple Aim Model of Care1. Improved Patient Experience
2. Integral Perspectives and Change
3. Integrative Lifestyle Health and Well-being
4. Awareness and Choice
5. Listening with HEART©

(Dossey, 2015)

team approach. In addition, it aligns with the Quadruple Aim Model of Care (Bodenheimer & Sinsky, 2014), summarized in Box 17.7.
  fte nuances and diversity of nurse coaching are many, whether it is coaching delivered at a cardiovascu-





RESEARCH ON COMPLEMENTARY AND INTEGRATIVE HEALTH APPROACHES

lar health clinic (Stuart-Mullen et al., 2015) or consid-	 	

ered through the theory of Integrative Nurse Coaching (Dossey & Luck, 2015), Transpersonal Coaching (Schaub & White, 2015), or Cultural Diversity in Coaching (Southard, 2015).

National Certification as a Nurse Coach
fte AHNCC is committed to values that enhance professional practice and contribute to competency for practicing nurse coaches. fte AHNCC Nurse Coach certification examination is given frequently during the year at various locations across the country. Review courses are available to assist in preparation for the examination (https://www.ahncc.org).
Nurse coaches have the responsibilities listed in
Box 17.8.
   Health care is developing a greater focus on health, wellness, well-being, and prevention. It is critical that APNs step forward to provide clear leadership and direc- tion. Becoming certified as an advanced practice holistic nurse allows practitioners to receive advanced education for both their own self-care and care of others. Holistic nursing is based on facilitating an individual’s greatest state of wellness and quality of life, regardless of the population or setting. Nursing leaders certified in holis- tic nursing, advanced practice holistic nursing, or nurse coaching have an extensive background from which to draw to ensure that health care is really about health care.

fte Complementary Health Questionnaire is admin- istered every 5 years as part of the NHIS in which thousands of Americans are interviewed about their health- and illness-related experiences. fte survey considers the diverse medical and health-care systems, practices, and products that are not generally considered part of conventional approaches to health care.
   It is noteworthy that over the last three decades national surveys have consistently demonstrated increas- ing use of complementary approaches to health care. fte most current national survey was conducted in 2017 and focused on the use of complementary practices not included in other large national surveys, such as medita- tion, yoga, and chiropractic.
   Data from the 2017 NHIS showed that yoga and meditation significantly increased over previous years, whereas chiropractic usage had increased modestly for adults and remained the same for children. fte trends are based on a comparison with the 2012 survey.
Survey highlights for adults include the following:
• Yoga was the most commonly used complementary health approach among U.S. adults in 2012 (9.5%) and 2017 (14.3%).
• fte use of meditation increased more than threefold
from 4.1% in 2012 to 14.2% in 2017.
• fte use of chiropractors increased from 9.1% in 2012 to 10.3% in 2017.



• In 2017, women were more likely to use yoga, meditation, and chiropractors in the past 12 months than men.
• Non-Hispanic white adults were more likely to use
yoga, meditation, and chiropractors than Hispanic adults and non-Hispanic black adults.
Survey highlights for children include the following:
• fte percentage of children aged 4 to 17 years who used yoga in the past 12 months increased signifi- cantly from 3.1% in 2012 to 8.4% in 2017.
• Meditation increased significantly from 0.6% in 2012
to 5.4% in 2017.
• ftere was no statistically significant difference in chil- dren’s use of chiropractors between 2012 and 2017 (3.5% and 3.4%, respectively).
• In 2017, girls were more likely to have used yoga
during the past 12 months than boys.
• In 2017, older children (aged 12 to 17 years) were more likely to have used meditation and a chiroprac- tor in the past 12 months than younger children (aged 4 to 11 years).
• Non-Hispanic white children were more likely to have
used yoga and a chiropractor in the past 12 months than non-Hispanic black children or Hispanic children (https://www.nccih.nih.gov/news/press-releases/more- adults-and-children-are-using-yoga-and-meditation).
  In 2012, the NCCIH report included the newly developed subgroups of natural products, mind and body practice, and other complementary approaches. fte report overview follows:
• Natural products (dietary supplements other than vitamins and minerals) were the most commonly used complementary approach: 17.7% of adults and 4.9% of children aged 4 to 7.
• More than 50% had some pain during the 3 months
before the survey and used some complementary health approach.
• Adults who take natural products or who practice
yoga were more likely to do so for wellness reasons than to treat a specific condition. However, people who used spinal manipulation more often did so for treatment reasons rather than for wellness.
• Of chiropractic care users, 60% had some insurance
coverage, whereas 25% of acupuncture users had insurance and only 15% had insurance for massage.
• 
Approximately 69 million American paid out of pocket for complementary health approaches with total spending up to $30.2 billion per year.
   A questionnaire of 277 patients at a naturopathic clinic in Toronto, Canada, revealed that 99% of the patients surveyed were using natural products, and 46% were using natural health products and prescrip- tion medications concurrently. Of those using natural products, 42% did not disclose use to their primary care physician. ftis was a repeat of a similar question- naire administered in 2003 at the same clinic. Nothing has changed in 15 years. In the newer survey, the two top reasons for not disclosing were (1) medical doc- tors do not approve of complementary and alternative approaches, and (2) medical doctors would not under- stand (Depro, 2019). fte results of this survey are very similar to results of the 1998 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS) survey (USDHHS, 1998). It would appear that in over 25 years there has been no change in patients’ trust of medical physicians regarding the use of supplements by patients.

National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health as a Resource
Health-care professionals and consumers alike will find that the NCCIH is a vitally important link for informa- tion about many resources in the public domain, includ- ing dietary and herbal supplements, safety information, and clinical trials, as well as grants and funding. Resources are now easily available through direct download or by signing up online for their updates.
   As evidence-based research is becoming more prom- inent, it is also easily accessible on the NCCIH Web site. Listing of both conducted and sponsored research is readily available along with highlights of recently published studies funded by the NCCIH (https://www
.nccih.nih.gov).
   With COVID-19, it has become even more evident that consumers are engaging in complementary health approaches, whether a health-care professional guides them or not. Consumers want to be in charge of their health and are taking increasing responsibility for their well-being. As APNs, we must be knowledgeable about the safety and efficacy of complementary therapies to assist clients to choose the best approaches.



COMPLEMENTARY AND INTEGRATIVE HEALTH AND ADVANCED PRACTICE HOLISTIC NURSING

fte advanced practice holistic nurse (APHN) sup- ports patients in their choice of complementary health approaches, makes recommendations, and delivers safe and effective complementary approaches when appro- priate. Being able to see the whole person, respect the person’s values, and recognize what is important in their life are important components of effective quality care.
   fte nurse often leads by example, and what better example is one’s own self-care? We cannot give what we do not have. ftink about it this way: How effectively can we talk about and/or assist another to stop smoking when we smell of tobacco smoke? We can be effective only to the limit of what and who we are. People look up to nurses, and their expectation is that we are healthy and striving to lead healthier lives.

Examples of Complementary and Integrative Health Approaches (CIHA) in the Literature
From the inception of AHNA in 1981, holistic nurses were busy building a research base for holistic nursing. At first, articles were published only in their own refereed Journal of Holistic Nursing Research. fte first articles were case studies and observational narratives. But over the years, the articles became more sophisticated as holistic nurses began to obtain advanced degrees.
  Even before the landmark study conducted by Eisenberg and colleagues (1993), nurses were practic- ing and publishing about CIH approaches. Snyder’s Independent Nursing Interventions (1985) included CIH approaches (e.g., relaxation, imagery, massage). Clark (1986) wrote Wellness Nursing, and Dossey and Keegan’s Holistic Nursing: A Handbook for Practice was first pub- lished in 1988. Clements and Martin wrote Nursing and Holistic Wellness (1990).
   Zahourek authored early papers on the use of hypnosis to manage pain (1982a, 1982b) and two clinically based books, Clinical Hypnosis and Therapeutic Suggestion in Nursing (1985) and Relaxation and Imagery (1988). Delmar published The Nurse as Healer, a series of small books edited by Keegan on such topics as Creative Imagery in Nursing (Shames, 1996) and Awareness in Healing (Rew, 1996).
  
McCloskey and Bulechek (1992) classified several of these same therapies as nursing interventions in the year before Eisenberg and colleagues’ report (1993). fteir 7-year research project funded by the National Institute of Nursing culminated in the publication of the Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC). ftis comprehensive standardized classification of research-based nursing interventions (McCloskey & Bulechek, 2000) included “simple guided imagery” (p. 595), “simple massage” (p. 596), and “simple relaxation therapy” (p. 598). fte literature since then has blossomed, and articles now appear with great regularity on holistic approaches and nurses’ involvement with CIH.
General practice journals such as American Nurse
and American Journal of Nursing as well as specialty journals (e.g., Journal of the American Psychiatric Nurses Association), theoretical journals such as Nursing Science Quarterly, and research journals such as Nursing Research and The Journal of Holistic Nursing, all publish articles related to CIH practice. In addition, the seventh edi- tion of Holistic Nursing: A Handbook for Practice was published in 2016 by editors Barbara Dossey and Lynn Keegan. ftese publications are valuable resources for holistic nursing theory development and for providing the newest research and thinking on numerous CIHA practiced by holistic nurses.
ftere are three holistic nursing journals of signifi-
cance: (1) The Holistic Nursing Research Journal, refereed, quarterly published by Sage; (2) Beginnings, published six times a year with its name highlighting that all moments are in some way the start of another moment; and (3) Holistic Nursing Practice: The Science of Health and Healing, published six times a year by Sage.

Natural Products
Natural products include herbs, also known as botanicals, vitamins and minerals, and probiotics. Although widely marketed and readily available to consumers, these prod- ucts are often sold as dietary supplements. fte 2012 NHIS included a comprehensive survey on the use of complementary health approaches by Americans, finding that 17.7% of American adults used a dietary supplement other than vitamins and minerals during the past year. fte most commonly used natural product was fish oil.
  fte Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is currently developing guidelines for good manufacturing



practices (GMPs) for dietary supplements because these products are not subject to premarket approval or surveillance. Americans use supplements and herbs to promote overall health, to improve performance and energy, to treat depression, and to treat and prevent such illnesses as colds and flu. Because new research changes our knowledge base, readers are referred to the NCCIH and Cochrane Review Web sites where updated research results from large national studies and systematic reviews on natural products can be found (https://www.nccih
.nih.gov) and (http://www.cochrane.org).
  fte journal Holistic Nursing Practice has a regular column on herbs and supplements by Stephanie Ross with timely information on COVID-19 and integrative health approaches (2020). Topics have included the use of cranberry for urinary tract infections, chocolate for cardiovascular health, valerian for sleep, and St. John’s wort for mild to moderate depression. Health effects of omega-3 fatty acids for people with depression and B vitamins and berries in age-related neurodegenerative diseases are also being reported on the NCCIH and Cochrane Review Web sites. fte NCCIH has several Web pages devoted to herbs and supplements. fte page “Herbs at a Glance” lists 42 popular herbs that can be accessed, including black cohosh, cranberry, ephedra, ginger, gingko biloba, kava, milk thistle, and green tea. Consult the NCCIH Web site for the most current information on the effectiveness of these herbs as well as drug-herb supplement interactions.
APNs—and	particularly	those	with	prescrip-
tive authority—need to know how to access accurate information on herbal remedies and supplements. Many patients may use supplements without knowledge of their dosages, effects, or potential side effects. Used for centuries and in many cultures, herbs can be as effec- tive as manufactured medications; therefore, some of the same cautions exist. Cautions for herbs and supplements are listed in Box 17.9.
   As indicated in the Research on Complementary and Integrative Health Approaches section of this chapter, many patients do not tell their health-care providers what supplements or herbs they are taking. Consequently, it is vital to explore with your patients all the medicines, supplements, and over-the-counter remedies they take, including substances recommended by a friend. For the practitioner to be knowledgeable in



NCCHI Cautions for Herbs and Supplement
     Usage
• Substitution of an herb/supplement for a conventional medication
• Potential impact of the supplement on the
client’s overall condition
• Potential interactions between the supplement/ herb and other medications
• Potential risks with diabetes, hypertension,
or mental health problems such as depression or facing invasive procedures
• During pregnancy or when treating children
this area is invaluable and just might save a patient a trip to the emergency department. It’s okay to say to a patient, “Oh, I don’t know that one. Tell me about it.” ftis engenders trust and openness, further building a warm, caring relationship.
Aromatherapy
Jane Buckle introduced aromatherapy to nursing in 1995. As a popular natural product, aromatherapy is grounded in a holistic philosophy of treating the whole person. Basically, essential oils derived from plants (com- mon herbs) are either placed on cotton near a person or in a steam diffuser. Aromatherapy is often used in conjunction with conventional therapies for pain, anx- iety, spasms, insomnia, and infection (Buckle, 2015) As with herbs and supplements, the practitioner needs to be aware of potential side effects, interactions, and aller- gies (Tisserand & Young, 2014). ftese oils should never be used internally because they are many times stronger than the herb itself.
Aromatherapy research began with anecdotal  reports
describing positive effects in nursing homes, hospi- tals, and emergency departments (Garner, 2007). Now, because of much more sophisticated research, aromatherapy is proving to be an exciting addition to the health care of clients. For example, Canella and associates (2012) clearly demonstrated that the use of peppermint aromatherapy can be advantageous in treat- ing nausea in women post C-section. Aromatherapy has



been documented to help in a wide variety of diverse conditions. For example, eucalyptus and tea tree have shown promise as alternatives for treating methicillin- resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and tuberculosis (Sherry & Warnke, 2002), behavior problems in demen- tia (Fung et al., 2012), renal colic (Ayan et al., 2013), and wound healing (Chin & Cordell, 2013).
   An example of a relatively new use of aromatherapy is the “M” technique copyrighted by Jane Buckle (2016). In an aromatherapy massage or “M” technique, most of the essential oil evaporates and is inhaled by the patient. As a result, any effect is the combination of topically applied and inhaled essential oils. Between the gentle touch and the oils, the patient may relax and breathe slowly and deeply.
  fte “M” is a registered method of gentle, struc- tured touch suitable for the very frail, actively dying, or stressed individual. It is also a gentle way to soothe someone with touch without the therapist being trained in massage. Anyone can learn the technique—caregivers, family members, volunteers, patient ambassadors, and friends in addition to nurses and other health profession- als. Because the “M” technique is gentle, it can be used when conventional massage would be inappropriate, like at the end of life.

Mind and Body Approaches to Advanced Practice Nursing
Notice that this section is titled “Mind and Body,” not “Body and Mind.” ftis matches the wording used by the NCCIH. Is the NCCIH recognizing the power of the mind over the body? Perhaps. Health care, like everything else, is changing. Change usually starts in little ways that are barely noticeable. For example, a woman in the first 3 months of pregnancy has very few outer physical changes. Gradually, over the next 28 weeks, the changes become more noticeable. fte shift to “Mind and Body” could be the beginning of a larger, more inclusive model of health, distinct from the predominantly biomedical model. Time will tell.
Table 17.3 lists the 10 most common complemen-
tary health approaches reported in the 2012 NHIS Con- sumer Survey.
   According to the NIH News in Health (2013), re- searchers are exploring the effects of stress and often


   TaBle 17.3	
The 10 Most Common Complementary Health Approaches

Natural Products	17.0%Deep Breathing	10.9%Yoga/Tai Chi/Qigong	10.0%Chiropractic/Osteopathic Manipulation	8.4%Meditation	8.0%Massage	6.9%Special Diets	3.0%Homeopathy	2.2%Progressive Relaxation	2.1%Guided Imagery	1.7%
combine the relaxation techniques of deep breathing and focused attention to calm the mind and body. Relaxation techniques include progressive relaxation, biofeedback, guided imagery, self-hypnosis, and deep- breathing exercises. Unfortunately, most studies on the efficacy of these techniques have small sample sizes and so are not generalizable. What we do know is that, holistically, relaxation techniques work even better when combined with good nutrition, regular exercise, and a strong social support system. Perhaps these last three “techniques”—nutrition, exercise, and a strong support system—are the base for general health and well-being.

Five Things to Know About Relaxation Techniques for Stress
When you’re under stress, your body reacts by releasing hormones that produce the “fight-or-flight” response. Your heart rate and breathing rate go up, and blood ves- sels narrow (restricting the flow of blood). Occasional stress is a normal coping mechanism. But over the long- term, stress may contribute to or worsen a range of health problems including digestive disorders, headaches, sleep disorders, and other symptoms.



   In contrast to the stress response, the relaxation response slows the heart rate, lowers blood pressure, and decreases oxygen consumption and levels of stress hormones. In theory, voluntarily creating the relaxation response through regular use of relaxation techniques could counteract the negative effects of stress.
1. Relaxation techniques are generally safe, but there is limited evidence of usefulness for specific health conditions. Research is under way to find out more about relaxation and health outcomes.
2. Relaxation techniques include a number of practices such as progressive relaxation, guided imagery, biofeedback, self-hypnosis, and deep breathing exercises. fte goal is similar in all: to consciously produce the body's natural relaxation response, characterized by slower breathing, lower blood pressure, and a feeling of calm and well-being.
3. Relaxation techniques often combine breath- ing and focused attention to calm the mind and the body. ftese techniques may be most effec- tive when practiced regularly and combined with good nutrition, regular exercise, and a strong social support system.
4. Most relaxation techniques can be self-taught and self-administered. Most methods require only brief instruction from a book or an experienced practi- tioner before they can be done without assistance.
5. Do not use relaxation techniques as a replace- ment for conventional care or to postpone seeing a doctor about a medical problem. Talk to your health-care provider if you are considering using a relaxation technique for a particular health condi- tion. ftis will help ensure coordinated and safe care (https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/tips/things-to- know-about-relaxation-techniques-for-stress).
   Meditation is often recommended as a stress-reduction technique. Probably the most common types of medita- tion are guided meditation and mindfulness meditation. Zeidan and colleagues (2016) addressed mindfulness meditation, pain relief, and endogenous opioids. fte subjects were 78 healthy adults who were either med- itating or not meditating while receiving painful heat stimuli and IV administration of either an opioid antag- onist or a saline placebo. fte findings demonstrate that mindfulness meditation reduces pain independently of

opioid neurotransmitter mechanisms. fte results sug- gest that combining mindfulness-based and pharma- cological pain-relieving approaches that rely on opioid signaling may be particularly effective in treating pain. In 2018, Hoge and associates completed a random- ized study providing the first combined hormonal and immunological evidence that mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) may enhance resilience to stress.
  fte NCCIH reviewed studies on mind-body inter- ventions with cancer patients and found evidence that these interventions aid in improving mood, coping, and quality of life as well as in ameliorating chemotherapy- induced nausea, vomiting, and pain. In general, their review suggests strong evidence exists that these tech- niques also are effective in the treatment of coronary artery disease and enhance cardiac rehabilitation.
   For studies on specific subjects or systematic reviews, search Google Scholar (scholar.google.com).
The Placebo Effect
fte placebo effect is an unexpected beneficial mind-body response that results from a person’s anticipation that an intervention—pill, procedure, or injection—will help. A clinician’s style in interacting, certain symbols such as the stethoscope, and certain rituals are easily and con- sciously used during an interaction and may bring about a positive response that is independent of any specific treatment.
   Response to placebos has been studied and docu- mented experimentally and confirmed in laboratory studies for medical disorders. Nevertheless, the mech- anism of action of placebos is still a mystery. It seems that the connection between the practitioner and the patient is an important piece in the puzzle. fte heal- ing relationship appears to be an important factor in the delivery of care and probably in the placebo effect. Consider a small child who has fallen and scraped his knee. He runs crying to his mother, who “cures” him by picking him up, hugging him, giving him a kiss, and saying “All better.” Several well-designed studies have examined aspects of the provider–patient relationship and the patient’s response to a placebo. fte evidence is strong that numerous aspects of the relationship enhance the placebo response. Meta-analytic evidence reveals that this relationship definitely improves physical and mental health services. ftere appear to be three conceivable ways



that the relationship amplifies the response to placebo:
(1) it combats loneliness, (2) it increases expectancy for relief, and (3) it coregulates emotions and decreases arousal (Wampold, 2018).
Guided Imagery
As a holistic phenomenon, guided imagery is described as a “multidimensional mental representation of reality and fantasy that includes not only visual pictures but also remembrance of situations and experiences such as sound, smell, touch, movement and taste” (Zahourek, 2002, p. 113). Imagery takes many different forms including behavioral rehearsal, impromptu imagery, biologically based, and symbolic and/or metaphoric im- agery. Ashen (1977) developed a still-relevant theory of imagery: Images are stored in the mind as an experien- tial unit that includes the image, the somatic response, and its meaning. In this context, imagery is used as a therapeutic tool for aiding anxiety and pain and as a behavioral rehearsal for change.
Imagery has a plethora of uses in many health-care
situations. Imagery is frequently used in healing trauma and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), where it is often combined with cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). Imagery is used in treating numerous acute situations such as preparation for childbirth and for surgery as well as augmenting and minimizing side effects from medications and treatments. Grief reso- lution is, in part, an imagery process. People can be guided to imagine their loss and themselves as strong and coping and to subsequently find meaning in their experience.
   Recent studies reveal some of the versatility of guided imagery in different medical situations. Case and col- leagues (2018) confirmed that guided imagery improves mood, fatigue, and quality of life in individuals with multiple sclerosis. Meanwhile, Billquist and associates (2018) found that guided imagery improved patient re- covery from pelvic floor surgery when combined with an overnight stay on the day of surgery and continued post- operative use of guided imagery for 6 weeks. At the same time, Giacobbie and colleagues (2018) justified using guided imagery to address multiple health behaviors generally and more specifically psychological stress, food cravings, and physical activity behavior with overweight and obese women.

Energy Approaches and Holistic Nursing Practice
fte concept of the human energy field is one basis for the practice of holistic nursing. Other health approaches, such as yoga, acupuncture, tai chi, acupuncture, acupressure, Reiki, HT, and TT, also base their practice on the human energy field. Energy fields are open, dynamic, and con- stantly changing. “Imbalanced Energy Field is the nurs- ing diagnosis when nursing assessment reveals that there is a disruption in the vital flow of human energy that is normally a continuous whole and is unique, creative and non-linear” (Herdman & Kamitsuru, 2018, p. 225). ftis NANDA diagnosis was reconceptualized within Roger’s Science of Unitary Human Beings (Smith, 2019).
Energy therapies include both hands-on and
nontouching approaches that work in the person’s biofield of energy. Energy therapies most often used by nurses include TT, HT, and Reiki. ftey are purported to facilitate both physical and energetic balance as well as to reduce symptoms of disease and the disease itself. Denner (2009) discusses the science of energy therapies as “communication networks,” relating them to con- cepts from quantum physics as well as ancient Eastern and Shamanic healing practices. Being centered, focused, meditative, and intentional are foundations for these prac- tices. Generally, the practitioner holds an intention for the greatest good for the person rather than for specific out- comes. fte practitioner’s qualitative sensations of energy flow and balance are the cornerstones of these approaches. Energy approaches are currently taught in continuing education and in holistic nursing programs and courses.
Conducting research on energetic modalities has been
difficult in both nursing and in CIHA. Engebretson and Wardell (2007) discussed in detail the methodological issues and problems for these approaches that apply to research. Floriani (2016) reports the positive effects of energy therapies at the end of life, whereas Hart (2016) notes effects with chronic pain and addiction. Research continues to support that these energetic approaches produce comfort and relaxation and do not cause harm, unless an important conventional treatment is avoided.

Therapeutic Touch, Healing Touch, and Reiki
In the early 1970s, nurse Dolores Krieger and healer Dora Kunz developed therapeutic touch (TT) to help



people with comfort and healing. fte early research was narrative and observational, often relying on case stud- ies. By the mid-1990s, methodologies had advanced, and there was a flurry of research. According to meta-analyses of studies on the effects of TT (including quantitative, qualitative, and mixed-methods research), TT is useful in decreasing anxiety and promoting comfort (Peters, 1999; Winstead-Fry & Wijeck, 1999). Madrid and associates (2010) looked at the feasibility of introducing TT into the operative environment with patients undergoing cerebral angiography. Although the protocol was successful, the therapeutic impact of TT was not statistically significant, possibly because of the small sample size. However, TT does show potential to contribute to a positive patient experience in an operative setting. Some studies have also been conducted on the effect of TT on wound healing, but these effects have been inconsistent.
fte internal process of TT begins with centering
or calming and focusing prior to “treating” a patient (Coppa, 2008). Imagine that you are the NP entering a busy newborn nursery. You have the goal of calming the environment. Using one hand, so as not to overwhelm the infant, you scan one infant’s field. Sometimes you feel slight imbalances in the energy field closest to the infant’s body. Most often, the field is felt as congested or electrically charged. With well infants, only smooth- ing and unruffling are the treatment strategies needed to calm the baby. While the NP is using the right hand to do the treatment, the left hand is gently holding the baby’s feet. fte baby’s field is reassessed. fte treatment takes 2 to 3 minutes. ften you move on to the next infant. Most babies first become quiet and hypervig- ilant of their environment. fteir eyes open, and they appear almost slightly stunned. In all cases, TT assists the infants to quiet (adapted from Aveno, 2016).
Healing touch, a biofield energy modality, evolved
from TT in the early 1980s and was more extensively developed as a training program by Janet Mentgen in 2002. Similar to TT, HT incorporates other theories and practices. It is based on the idea that the body is a complex energy system that can be influenced by anoth- er’s intention for healing and well-being. In a review of over 30 studies on HT, Wardell and Weymouth (2004) found that the studies reported positive results in reduc- ing stress, anxiety, and pain and in enhancing healing time and quality of life. However, the quality of the

research was such that the results could not be general- ized. Wardell compiled an annotated bibliography that is available on the Healing Touch International Web site (http://healingtouch.net).
   HT research continues with major articles including the following. Tang and colleagues (2010) concluded that training nurse leaders in an academic health cen- ter in HT is associated with significant improvements in subjective and objective measures of stress. Decker and colleagues (2012) used HT as an intervention in older adults with persistent pain with interesting findings: Participants in both groups showed improvement in pain scores, which had implications for both HT and nursing care for older adults with pain. Wake Forest Medical Center evaluated the impact of HT on nurses beginning their training and reported significant improvement in their stress, depression, anxiety, relaxation, well-being, and sleep (Kemper, 2016).
Reiki, a Japanese spiritual practice originally practiced
outside of conventional health care, is an increasingly pop- ular approach to energy healing. Reiki is an energy-based therapy in which the practitioner’s vibrational energy is connected to a universal source (e.g., chi, qi, prana) and is transferred without touch to a recipient for healing. Reiki is similar to HT and TT, but the two latter approaches have had substantially more research and are grounded in nursing theory and practice. Baldwin and colleagues (2010) assembled three teams to collect and systematically review the research on Reiki. In meta-analysis, 26 Reiki articles have been reviewed for strengths and weaknesses. Only 12 articles were based on robust experimental design and used adequate outcome measures. fteir results and a database that continues to grow are accessible on the Web site https://www.centerforreikiresearch.org.
fte efficacy of Reiki has been researched with a wide
variety of health-care issues: pain, anxiety, and blood pressure in knee replacement (Baldwin et al., 2017); self-efficacy for coping during breast cancer presur- gery (Chirico, 2017); quality of life with blood cancer (Alarcao & Fonseca, 2016); and pain and vital signs after cesarean section surgery (Midilli & Gunduzoglu, 2016).
Emotional Freedom Technique
Initiated by Gary Craig in the 1990s, emotional freedom technique (EFT) is a form of psychological acupres- sure. It is based on the same energy meridians used in



traditional acupuncture to treat physical and emotional ailments for more than 5,000 years but without the invasiveness of needles. Instead, simple tapping with the fingertips is used to input kinetic energy onto specific meridians on the head and chest while the patient thinks about their specific problem—whether it is a traumatic event, an addiction, pain, and so on—and says positive affirmations.
   ftis combination of tapping and vocalizing works to clear the emotional block or “short circuit” from the body’s bioenergy system. ftis restores the mind-body balance, which is essential for optimal health and healing of phys- ical disease. EFT is based on the electromagnetic energy that flows through the body and regulates our health. EFT is only recently becoming recognized in the West.
   Because the techniques of EFT are so simple, they can be used effectively as a self-help tool, which empow- ers people to actively contribute to their own healing and development process. ftis facilitates much faster relief previously believed impossible by health-care pro- fessionals who advocated lengthy (and often painful) hours in psychotherapeutic or medical care, often with limited results. ftese techniques do not discredit the medical and psychotherapeutic professions but rather serve to contribute to a holistic healing process (http:// eft.mercola.com).
   EFT reviews and meta-analyses validate that EFT is an evidence-based practice. Its effectiveness for anxi- ety, depression, phobias, and PTSD is well established. Research investigating improvement of physiological markers of health after EFT intervention is, however, limited. A study by Bach and colleagues adds to the research and indicates that EFT is associated with mul- tidimensional improvements across a wide range of physiological systems (2019).
   Church and associates (2018) considered the epi- genetic effects of PTSD remediation in veterans using clinical EFT. ftere were noteworthy results. PTSD symp- toms declined significantly in the EFT group (?53%, P < 0.0001). Participants maintained their gains on follow-up. Significant differential expression of six genes was found (P < 0.05) when comparing the expression levels before and after the intervention period in partici- pants receiving EFT.
   EFT has also been used with students to decrease anxiety. Knowing that nursing students experience

considerable stress and anxiety in their education, a convenience sample of 39 students in an associate’s degree RN program were tested using a mixed-method design including a qualitative questionnaire for the subjective experience and a quantitative pretest–post-test design in order to determine the efficacy of EFT in decreasing anxiety. ftree instruments were used, the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI), the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), and a qualitative questionnaire. Decreased anxiety was statistically significant (P = 0.05) as identified on both the STAI and the PSS. Participants reported feel- ing calmer and more relaxed after using the technique (Patterson, 2016).
Quantum Physics
For more than a century, the field of quantum physics has been studied among physicists. ftis brief discussion is meant to encourage you to further explore the possi- bilities for quantum physics as the next step in health and healing. Although it appears that the difference be- tween what is occurring on the quantum level and the cellular level could be quantified, what is changing for certain is our level of understanding.
   Heisenberg (1958) was the first to publish the idea that the objective reality of Newtonian physics does not exist. In other words, quantum physics has made the notion of solid matter or “stuff” incomplete. fte quan- tum theory of nonlocality suggests a connection between objects that are synchronized and connected without regard to distance. ftis theory of action at a distance demonstrates how objects communicate faster than the speed of light (Shields & Wilson, 2016). Further, these ideas suggest a universal connectedness, whereby one can act instantaneously on another regardless of distance. ftis would validate and explain the effects of distant prayer and healing.
Today, consciousness has many descriptions, such as
the awareness of the world. One view by Watts (1960) suggested that consciousness was similar to an individ- ual “looking out” from inside their physical body and a function of the brain. Compare that with quantum physics, which proposes that we are more than benign viewers of what is outside ourselves in the world. ftink of consciousness as an assortment of subatomic pack- ets of information, moving in a distinct way, interact- ing with matter. In contrast, traditional  Newtonian



physics explains the world as matter separated by a void of nothing (Shields & Wilson, 2016).
  fte psychologist Carl Jung and the physicist Wolfgang Pauli together proposed that the concept of synchronicity might build the connection between hard science and the subjective experience. ftey saw synchro- nicity as “happenings” that seem unrelated but to which people attribute meaning. Further, synchronicity reveals an underlying pattern to the universe as a connected- ness that does not seem to be influenced by the distance between coincidental events. In this view, the world is not a series of random events. Rather, the universe has a deep sense of order (Shields & Wilson, 2016).
So, what are we really saying?
According to quantum physics in its simplest form, only one of two things happen in this life, this body, this planet and in the entire Universe—expansion or contraction. To expand means we are growing in wisdom, collecting data, and moving forward. . . . In other words, . . . creating. If we are contracting, then we are becoming stagnant, not open to change and dying. Recognizing and embracing the laws of quantum physics can bring tremendous benefits when combined with advanced energy awareness and practice. And, although we have become very proficient in our energy healing approaches, we are only working with the tip of the iceberg. (Drick, 2020, p. 15)
  It is important to note that there is currently no agreement on the theoretical concepts of quantum phys- ics and their relevance to healing. Some assert that min- ute waves are too small and cannot have an effect on the larger macro world. However, agreement is growing. Consider that in the 1800s, before Semmelweis’s germ theory was accepted, the “modern scientific minds” of the day declared things such as, “It’s too small to have an effect” or “Nothing too small for the human eye to see could cause disease; therefore, hand washing is a super- stitious ritual” (ftompson, 1949). ften, the microscope was perfected, and germ theory was corroborated.
We are at the edge of a potential breakthrough in
our understanding and thinking—a quantum shift in consciousness, if you will. Perhaps we need a new type of microscope to unmistakably display this subatomic world and its impact on living things.

National Opioid Crisis and Mind-Body Approaches
fte opioid crisis in the United States dropped out of the news with national attention focused on the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the United States remains in the midst of an unprecedented opioid epidemic. More than 130 people die each day in this country from opioid- related drug overdoses. As a result, research to find evidence to support alternative approaches is ongoing. Breathing, meditation, relaxation, and imagery have become standard approaches to assist sufferers in finding comfort.
   fte AHNA was one of the first responders to this cri- sis and created a “Holistic Pain Relief Toolkit” to educate and support nurses in the use of evidence-based non- pharmacological approaches in their nursing practice and self-care. fte toolkit includes educational content about using essential oils, physical and energetic touch, thermal applications, progressive muscle relaxation, meditation, MBSR, visualization, yoga, tai chi, and more for pain management and relief. It includes
• Content for nurses to learn ABOUT these approaches
• Content for nurses to learn HOW to perform these approaches
• Sample policies and procedures for facilities
   A free pdf is available for download or bulk requests may be ordered from https://www.ahna.org/Home/ Resources/Holistic-Pain-Tools.

Spirituality and Holistic Nursing
Spirituality is one part of the base triad of holistic nurs- ing. Holistically, we are looking at the mind, the body, and the spirit in an ever-changing environment, and spirituality is probably the most elusive of the three.
   Fortunately, holistic nurses have a Scope and Standards Practice, 3rd edition (ANA & AHNA, 2019, pp. 120–121) that defines spirituality and assists us in understanding it so that we have a common agreement on which to build our personal and professional life. Within our search for meaning, we often discover feel- ings, thoughts, experiences, and behaviors that can be called spiritual. We consider such discoveries sacred or holy. For some, these discoveries involve and invoke a sense of connection with an absolute or transcendent



spiritual force. Meaning, value, direction, and purpose are understood as valid aspects of both the person and the universe. Spirituality is seen as the essence of being and offers a relatedness that permeates all of life. ftis essence is manifested in one’s knowing, doing, and being. ftere is an interconnectedness among self, others, nature, God/Life Force/Absolute/Transcendent/ Spirit. Spirituality is greater than, and not synonymous with, religion.
   In practice, spiritual assessments as part of the holis- tic caring process (Core Value 3) gather information not only about a patient’s religious beliefs and practices but also their purpose and meaning in life and how these might be changing based on the present health expe- rience. Spiritual assessments ask questions about the patient’s source of peace and serenity, what gives them joy and fulfillment, what is their source of strength and hope. It includes looking at their sense of belonging in the world. fte assessment also includes their sense of relatedness with self, others, nature, and Universal Being or Life Force (ANA & AHNA, 2019, p. 30). All of this information allows for a richer understanding of the per- son, their health goals, and how to assist them to move forward in their health journey with you.
We need to become comfortable with our own spir-
ituality before we can assist another. ftis is another example of the importance of our self-care in all areas. It also speaks to the ongoing development of our self-care as we learn and experience new ideas, opportunities, and changes in our health and our lives.
   When we take care of ourselves in the small, every- day happenings, reflecting and growing, then when the larger, even catastrophic, events happen, we are in a better position to deal with them. For many, coping with this rapidly changing and increasingly technologi- cal world is causing a growing sense of disconnectedness and alienation. ftat does not need to happen.
   It all starts with you and your sense of connectedness to something greater than yourself. Simply taking a deep breath and then another and another is enough to start connecting you to yourself and your body. It brings you into the present moment because you can only breathe in this moment. When you are in this moment, focused on your breath, all the fear, alienation, and crisis are gone! Try it now. Remember: there is always simplicity within complexity. We just have to find it.
  
fte North American Nursing Diagnosis Association-International (NANDA-I) recognizes spiritual distress as a nursing diagnosis (Herdman & Kamitsuru, 2018), and the ANA’s Code of Ethics (2015) states that nurses must consider a person’s value system and religious beliefs. Burkhardt and Nagai-Jacobson (2002) did early work on spiritual- ity in nursing. They note that spirituality is different from religion; it is the “essence of our being . . . it permeates our living in relationships and infuses our unfolding awareness of who and what we are, our pur- pose in being, and our inner resources” (Burkhardt & Nagai-Jacobson, 2015, p. 135).
Spiritual practices, such as performing mindfulness
meditation, centering, practicing yoga, and developing the capacity to be present, are useful for nurses them- selves to prevent burnout and create a sense of purpose and meaning in busy and demanding practices.
   Baldacchino and Draper (2001) reviewed the literature since 1975 related to spiritual coping (187 articles) and concluded that illness often rendered feelings of a loss of control. Support of spiritual coping strategies in holistic care seemed to enhance self-empowerment, leading to a sense of purpose and meaning. Nurses need to know how to address patients’ spiritual needs as they arise. Eldridge (2007) lists nine spiritual interventions: be there, lis- ten actively, use touch, reflect and remember, laugh, share the experience, pray or encourage the patient to pray (meditate), use inspirational words or music, and evaluate spiritual needs.
It is well to remember, however, that as nurses we are
caregivers. It is incumbent upon us to respect the reli- gious beliefs and practices, or lack thereof, in those for whom we care.
   For patients whose spirituality encompasses the concept of blessings, being blessed is an important, yet often overlooked, area of nursing care. Atkinson (2019) explores blessing through lenses of various cultural and religious experiences. fte “Blessing of the Hands” ritual offers an illustration of practice offered by and experi- enced by holistic nurses and others in both clinical and educational settings. fte state of consciousness evoked by ritual blessings is consistent with holistic nursing val- ues and offers nurses a framework for amplified inten- tionality and Presence. It offers a deep appreciation for the sacredness of one’s work. fte blessing can serve to



heighten a sense of safety, protection, and belonging in both patients and practitioners.
   Describing spirituality as a personal experience of Presence not delineated by religion, Drick (2015) explains that in Presence, all our senses become involved, and we become alert and aware of an essence that is greater than our mind. Presence is an integral part of the holistic healing relationship. Burkhardt and Nagai- Jacobson (2015) view spiritual caregiving as grounded in attentiveness, in connection with self, others, nature, and the sacred; whereas, Schultz and Loen (2015) reflect on a personal pilgrimage as a sacred journey of physical challenge and self-reflection. fte journey is as important as the destination.
Spirituality is often especially important to those who
work in palliative care. fte spirituality of each mem- ber of the palliative care team becomes a single collec- tive spirituality or soul when caring for patients with advanced and terminal illness. With common goals, values, and belonging, this collective soul’s main goal is providing the best care for patients and caregivers in the easing of suffering. Each team member embraces spiritual care into their daily practice. Our role as col- lective soul members is twofold: by creating healing environments we preserve human dignity and raise up the broken souls of patients living with life-threatening illness (Delgado-Guay, 2018).

ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSING AND THE AGING POPULATION

By 2030, one in five Americans will be age 65 or older. ftis population numbers more than 72 million. It is clear that we already have inadequate facilities and infrastructure to serve the needs of older adults who are dying or living with debilitating chronic disease. More- over, the majority of our health-care providers, physi- cians, and nurses are neither trained in nor comfortable with dealing with the dying, let alone their own mor- tality. fte costs of caring for these individuals are spiraling out of control with the majority of Medicare funds spent in the last month of life (Keegan & Drick, 2011).
An APN must not only be skilled in caring for older
patients and those with terminal illnesses but must also

be comfortable with their own mortality. ftis seems to be a tall order; however, it is another example of not being able to give what we do not have. Our compas- sion can only go as far as we are comfortable. With an understanding of this, Keegan and Drick (2013) wrote The Golden Room: A Practical Guide for Death with Dignity to assist the lay public in beginning the discus- sion of death and dying with themselves, their families, and their friends.
   Death and dying is a subject that most adults find difficult to talk about in specific terms and often prefer to change the topic unless it is forced upon them. APNs have an opportunity to lead the way to assist patients to speak about this difficult but critically important topic and to gently use the words death, dying, and end of life. In this way, APNs demonstrate that it is OK to say the words aloud. Not saying the words does not make death go away or give it less power. In fact, most adults and children find their own comfort words— transition, pass- ing, going on, went to heaven. Astute nurses will pick up on these words and modify their approach accordingly.

Coalition to Transform Advanced Care (C-TAC)
On the national level in 2011, the Coalition to Transform Advanced Care (C-TAC) was established as the largest and most diverse coalition of its kind with more than 110 member organizations. fte coalition is dedicated to transforming the health-care delivery system for those with advanced illness in America. Notice that advanced illness and advanced care are their terms for “end of life” and “dying.” fte coalition brings together national experts to identify best practice models of care. ftey use this information to establish effective community health system partnerships. ften, they disseminate findings to improve the U.S. advanced-care laws and policies. ftis increasingly powerful organization offers free forums and presentations to update its constituents. In 2015, C-TAC published A Roadmap for Success: Transforming Advanced Illness Care in America (Novelli et al., 2015). ftis is indeed a definitive roadmap because it looks at the big picture, the key elements of reform, and action steps for taking this movement forward. C-TAC is located in Washington, DC, and is one of the most progressive and active end-of-life organizations.



   It is interesting to note that in 2014, the year before C-TAC published its Roadmap, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) released the report, Dying in America: Improving Quality and Honoring Individual Preferences Near the End of Life. This  landmark  report  changes the focus and tenor of health-care support near end of life. fte report concluded that “a patient-centered, family oriented, approach to care near the end of life should be a high national priority and that compas- sion, affordable, and effective care for these patients is an achievable goal.” Read those words again. Surely, they indicate that holism is entering the consciousness of health-care professionals at the highest levels in Washington, DC.

NURSE SELF-CARE IN THE HEALTH-CARE ENVIRONMENT

We have already considered extraordinary self-care as the critical element for nursing staff and APNs to thrive in the new normal. Our focus now considers the health-care environment. One of our greatest challenges as nurses is to remain clear and balanced regardless of what is happening in the health-care environment around us. When you realize that you are uncomfort- able, becoming stressed, and your smile is gone, it’s definitely time to STOP, take a few deep breaths, and look at your hands. Why your hands? Interestingly, hand washing can serve as a brief mindfulness meditation. No one questions a nurse washing their hands. Hand washing allows nurses time to take those few breaths and bring themselves into the present moment. Focus on feeling the soap, the water running over your hands, the friction and glide of your fingers, and the feeling of the water washing away the soap. ftis brief meditation allows you to return to the present moment and see things more clearly.
Nurses have found that stopping at the door before
entering a patient’s room and taking three to four slow, easy breaths to focus on their breathing assists them in turning their attention completely on this patient and his or her needs. Breathing, refocusing, and setting intention can also occur when you wash your hands between patients. Frequent self-reflection, centering, and setting intention are ways to relax and prevent

burnout as well as to focus attention more completely on the patient and the tasks at hand. ftese are simple steps that can immediately be implemented and that require no extra time. Rather, they are part of what you are already doing.
   In 2016, the ANA engaged in a yearlong Culture of Safety Campaign, Safety 360. ftis was part of the ANA’s Healthy Nurse, Healthy Nation 2020 initiative. Although we can and do create a culture of safety for our patients, it is also important to create a culture of safety for ourselves—the caregivers. As nurses, we often for- get this part. fte ANA’s (2015) Code of Ethics for Nurses with Interpretive Statements fully supports safety both for patients and for nurses. One important way to create this culture of safety is to be attentive and mindful. When the nurse is fully present, alert, and aware, decisions are not only precise but also appropriate because they affect human lives (Drick, 2016a).
Self-care appears challenging in today’s complex,
fast-moving society and equally demanding health-care environment. Drick (2016b) proposes simple, effective ways to integrate self-care into our busy professional lives without adding extra time. For instance, in the kitchen, squat for anything lower than the countertop. ftis strengthens pelvic floor muscles for both men and women and for women improves bladder control and sexual pleasure, especially after childbirth. What about keeping an ongoing shopping list? Planning meals for the week and shopping weekly saves time and money. And that’s self-care, too. Nurses are creative with their clients. Use that same creativity to discover solutions to promote your own self-care and healing.

Creating a Healing Environment
By the turn of the century, health-care facilities were becoming more aware of the need to create heal- ing environments. Newer hospitals had largely pri- vate rooms that are bright with pleasant views. More space was provided in patient rooms to allow for fam- ilies. fte impact of noise and aromas was considered. fte old staff locker room was being replaced in some forward-thinking institutions with stress-reducing, peaceful spaces with recliners, soft lighting, and music where staff could rest. fte literature was full of articles describing new ways to create a healing environment.



By 2015, healing environments were a top priority, and now they are expected in both new buildings and reno- vations to older ones.
   Realizing the importance of healing environments, the AHNA devoted the December 2015 Beginnings to Nurses Go Green: Greener Places Mean Wellness Spaces. Koenig (2015) advocated for nurses as stewards and advocates for our health and food systems, embracing our connection to nature through connect- ing to the Earth and our food sources. Shields (2015) reflected upon opening our eyes to what is happening to our planet even if it breaks our hearts. Case (2015) imagined what nurses could do to enrich their patients’ well-being if they took time to tune into nature and had healthy environments. Reid (2015) described the Five Principles of Reiki from Usuri, its founder, as they related to holistic nursing and beekeeping. Bennett (2015) reframed climate change conversations within

healing. fte six environmental variables that directly affect or facilitate one or more dimensions of healing are
• Homelike environment
• Access to views and nature
• Light
• Noise control
• Barrier-free environment
• Room layout
   ftere is limited scientific research confirming design solutions for creating healing spaces; the literature review discovered relationships providing a base for a draft defi- nition. Healing spaces evoke a sense of cohesion of the mind, body, and spirit. ftey support healing intention and foster healing relationships (DuBose et al., 2018).


PRACTICE ISSUES FOR APNs AND CIHA

the context of resilience—disabling obstructions, plan-	 	

ning for the future, and maintaining openness to change so that we can live sustainably.
   Our understanding and valuing of different kinds of healing spaces has expanded in the last 20 years as seen in the following example. In one study, a “fairy gar- den” was placed within a hospital in northern ftailand as a nonclinical environment providing sick children with exposure to nature, play activities, and spaces to explore. Findings from the study include three main threads: (1) freedom to be a child, not a sick child,
(2) engaging in care and professionalism, and (3) a moment in time of living fantasy. Student nurses in this study had an understanding of health care broader than the biomedical model alone. ftis new understanding transformed their learning and opened their eyes to a more holistic approach to humanizing care of sick children (Reit et al., 2017).
   Evidence-based design (EBD) research has demon- strated the power of environmental design. ftese designs support improved patient, family, and staff outcomes and minimize or avoid harm in health-care settings. ftere is increasing recognition that health-care systems could do more to promote overall wellness. ftis necessi- tates expanding the focus to healing. How can we expand what we know from EBD about health impacts of spatial design to the more elusive goal of healing? ftis review of literature identifies how health-care spaces can foster

fte APN’s responsibility to society’s changing health-care needs can be interpreted through the ANA’s Social Policy Statement (2010). In this document, expansion “refers to the acquisition of new practice knowledge and skills and legitimizing role autonomy within areas of practice that overlap traditional boundaries of medical practice.” Expansion includes specialization and “is characterized by the integration of theoretical, research-based, and practical knowledge (as part of graduate education)” (p. 4). New practice knowledge and skills related to holism and complementary approaches for APNs may include CIHA science, nursing science, research-based nursing interventions, and guidelines for integrative or holistic practice.
Fowler’s (2015) interpretation of ANA’s Social Policy
Statement includes:
• “Provision for the public health for increasing respon- sibility for basic self-help measures by the individual, family, group, community or population that comple- ment the use of health promotion, disease prevention and environmental measures” (p. 3).
• “Expanded facilities and workforce capacity for per-
sonal care and community health services are needed to support & enhance the capacity for self-help and self- care of individuals, families, groups, communities and populations” (p. 3).



   Certainly, self-care and self-help are germane to holistic nursing and are finding wider recognition and acceptance within the national health-care community. ftis opens the door for nurses, and especially APNs, to include new knowledge and practices related to CIHA and holistic living in their nursing practice.
   fte AHNA Position on the Role of Nurses in the Prac- tice of Complementary and Integrative Health Approaches (2016) states “it is expected that the nurse integrates principles and techniques of conventional, complemen- tary, and alternative practices, that these are within the scope of nursing practice and that this is holistic nursing care” (p. 258). fte Position goes on to clarify the nurse’s role. “fte AHNA believes that although selected CIHA are appropriate interventions for use by nurses, the use of these interventions must be integrated with comprehen- sive holistic nursing practice. However, practicing within a holistic nursing framework does not imply competence in all interventions used in nursing practice. Nurses are responsible for gaining additional education and experience and demonstrating clinical competence in all interventions they use in their nursing practice” (p. 259).

The Consensus Model and Implications for APNs
Since approximately 2005, major changes in society shifted the focus of advanced practice credentialing from validation of expertise to requirement for leadership roles in the transformation of health care. Nursing’s re- sponse was to develop the Consensus Model, designed to standardize graduate nursing, provide a framework for legislating graduate nursing practice, and provide stan- dardized educational guidelines.
  fte AHNCC recognized the need to create a struc- ture for graduate nursing that would guide legislation and education. It also recognized that health-care reform calls for nurses who are expert in the knowledge and skills of holistic healing. ftese nurses recognize the cli- ent as the expert in their own care and use the self as an instrument of healing. Certified graduate holistic nurses are uniquely prepared to assume national leadership roles. Certified holistic nurses as APNs have the addi- tional expertise in complementary approaches in addi- tional to biomedical skills and knowledge. ftese nurses take the best from both worlds to apply to their practice.
  
As a result, the AHNCC, with the endorsement of the AHNA, has taken a proactive position that APHN, both with and without prescriptive authority, should be included in the Consensus Model. Several position statements (2005–2013) distinguishing the philosophy, knowledge, and skills of the holistic nurs- ing model from the biomedical model of nursing and requesting its inclusion in the Consensus Model were drafted, disseminated, and also posted on the AHNCC Web site. A major White Paper defining the unique roles of certified advanced holistic nurses (AHN-BC) and certified advanced practice holistic nurses (APHN-BC), declaring intent to pursue recog- nition of the AHN-BC and APHN-BC and to draft the Essentials of Graduate Level Holistic Nursing education, was disseminated in November 2015. As of this writing (July 2020), the Consensus Task Force has submitted all the necessary paperwork and will be applying for formal recognition and inclusion in the Consensus Model. All documents are available on the AHNCC Web site (https://ahncc.org).

Educational Considerations for Holistic Nursing Plus CIHA
Preparing APNs with the education and experiences to support patients in their plans to use complementary and integrative approaches and to deliver safe and effective holistic nursing care is a challenge for nurse educators, continuing education providers, administrators, and accrediting agencies. Although holism and CIHA have been included in medical education, they are presented much more frequently and in greater depth in nursing undergraduate and graduate programs. fte inclusion of holistic nursing and CIHA in graduate and undergrad- uate nursing curricula is vital for all nurses to be current and knowledgeable in their practice.
For over four decades, members of the AHNA have
been committed to developing resources for nurses seeking to expand their practice. fte AHNA has an active and well-developed education committee that addresses curriculum development in formal education. It also monitors and endorses continuing education programs in holistic nursing and CIHA. Currently, 11 educational programs are endorsed by the AHNA. Endorsement comes only after a rigorous peer-review




American Holistic Nurses Association Certificate Programs• Clinical Acupressure Certificate
• Clinical Aromatherapy for Health Professionals (CAHP)
• Healing Touch for Health Care
• Healing Touch Program (HTP)
• Holistic Stress Management Instructor Workshop
• Integrative Aromatherapy Certificate Program
• National Institute of Whole Health Nurse Coaching
• RN Patient Advocates Learning Intensive
• Transcendental Meditation for Nurses
• Transpersonal Nurse Coaching
• Wisdom of the Whole Coaching Academy

process and approval by the ANHA board of directors. See Box 17.10.
   Educational opportunities and online modules such as Foundations of Holistic Nursing and Gerontology Modules are available on the AHNA Web site (https:// ahna.org). Continuing educational opportunities include monthly webinars on current topics, articles in the bimonthly journal Beginnings, and articles in the quar- terly refereed research Journal of Holistic Nursing. Current resources for accessing the scope of knowledge such as the Holistic Nursing: Scope and Standards of Practice and the Core Curriculum in holistic nursing are available for a fee. See Box 17.11.

American Holistic Nursing Certification Corporation (AHNCC)
National certification is an important and valued process that many AHNs choose to undertake. fte AHNCC offers two types of AHN examinations. fte first is for nurses who meet graduate-level requirements for advanced holistic nursing; the second is for AHNs who wish to practice at the prescriptive level. Both groups of nurses are required to master core graduate competencies; the second group is also required to master graduate competencies for prescriptive practice. fte national credential for the



first is AHN-BC; the second is APHN-BC. National cer- tification for AHNs requires graduation from a nationally accredited graduate nursing program; 48 continuing education hours of holistic nursing; and 300 hours prac- tice in advanced holistic nursing. See its Web site for more information (https://www.ahncc.org).
   National certification is pursued for both individ- ual and professional reasons. Personal reasons include a desire to grow and learn across the life span, affirmation of achievements, and personal empowerment related to professional achievement. Professionally, certification validates possession of the knowledge and set of skills required to practice a unique role, demonstrates acquired expertise to one’s community and stakeholders, meets basic requirements for professional advancement such as increase in salary and job promotion, and facilitates assumption of national leadership roles. Professional reasons for national certification have become a primary focus of AHNCC over the past several years.
AHNCC School Endorsement Program
In 2000, the AHNCC designed a school endorsement program to facilitate the advancement of holistic nurs- ing through nursing education (AHNA, 2002). fte



AHNCC endorses university-based academic undergrad- uate and graduate nursing curricula grounded in holistic nursing philosophy, theory, and concepts consistent with the AHNA Holistic Nursing: Scope and Standards of Practice (ANA & AHNA, 2019). fte AHNCC’s intent and goal are to support and facilitate curriculum devel- opment that advances holistic nursing consistent with the current and future health-care trends. Endorsement of these programs identifies universities that are gradu- ating nurses as transformational leaders that are focused on changing the health-care paradigm from one of ill- ness and disease to health promotion, wellness, and well-being. Graduates of these programs are eligible for certification in holistic nursing after passing the NCLEX and obtaining their RN license. See Table 17.4.

Holistic Nursing and CIHA
in Regulated Nursing Practice
Each state regulates its requirements for education and training, licensure, and reimbursement for CIHA prac- titioners and APNs. Understanding the qualifications and practice domains of nurses and other practitioners is the foundation for holistic nursing and integrative health approaches. Because holistic nursing is an ANA- recognized specialty, similar to pediatrics or medical- surgical, every state board of nursing (BON) is obligated to recognize holistic nursing, although they may choose to limit its practice.
   Annually, the AHNA prepares a nurse practice act (NPA) analysis report for each U.S. state’s BON



   TaBle 17.4	
American Holistic Nurses’ Certification Corporation, Endorsed Programs, July 2020

University/CollegeLocationProgram(s)Ameritech College of Health Care Capital UniversityPortland, OR Columbus, OHRN to BSN program
Baccalaureate, Accelerated BSN, and Master of Science in Nursing programsDrexel UniversityPhiladelphia, PAPost-Baccalaureate in Nursing, multiple certificate programsDuquesne UniversityPittsburgh, PABachelor of Science in Nursing, second degree Bachelor of Sciencein NursingEastern University College of NursingRichmond, KYBaccalaureate, accelerated BSN, entry level master’s, graduate, DNPFlorida Atlantic UniversityBoca Raton, FLBSN, accelerated BSN, RN-BSN programs, MSN, PhD, and DNPMetropolitan State UniversitySt. Paul, MNRN-BSN program, entry-level Master of ScienceMGH Institute of Health ProfessionalsCharleston, MAPostgraduate: Certificate of Advanced Mind Body Spirit, Nursing Certificate of Completion in Mind Body Spirit NursingPacific College of Health and ScienceSan Diego, CABSN Holistic Nursing, Post-Baccalaureate Certificate program in Holistic NursingQuinnipiac UniversityCamden, CTBaccalaureate and master’s programsUniversity of ConnecticutStorrs, CTHolistic Nursing Graduate Certificate programUniversity of Maine at AugustaAugusta, MERN to BSN programWestern Michigan University Bronson School of NursingKalamazoo, MIBaccalaureate programXavier UniversityCincinnati, OHBSN, ABSN, MSN, MIDAS, FNP, DNP, and CNL


on holistic nursing and CIHA performed by nurses in the respective state plus the board’s contact infor- mation. fte 2019 report is available on the AHNA Web site (https://ahna.org/Resources/Publications/State
-Practice-Acts).
   Four states have direct references in their nurse prac- tice acts that mention holism/holistic or that recognize holistic nursing as a specialty (IL, NV, OR, TX). Sixteen states incorporate reference and/or position statements separate from their nurse practice acts on holism/holistic treatments or CIHA. Not all BONs are authorized to adopt position statements. fte following is a summary of AHNA’s findings for the 16 states that incorporate holistic references:
• All complementary/alternative therapies (AR, FL, MN, NC, CA, ND, NY, TX)
• Hypnotherapy, dietary supplements, food additives,
homeopathic remedies or massage (AK, MA)
• fte role of nurses in businesses offering complementary/ alternative or holistic practices (KY, LA, MA, NH, NV, TX)
• Specific procedures and guidelines (ME, KY, WA)
  Since the initial analysis in 2011 and 2012, the following information has been discovered:
• Washington state BON renewed the “Medical

fterapies in Registered Nursing Practice,” but it was removed from its Web site in September 2015.
• fte New Hampshire BON recognizes alternative
therapies as something that RNs can perform.
• Florida has a section of Chapter 456 that pertains entirely to alternative health-care treatments by RNs. A section of the Florida Statues implemented on July 1, 2019, allows the Department of Veterans Affairs to contract with a state university or Florida College System Institution to provide any of the fol- lowing alternative treatments: accelerated resolution therapy, equine therapy, hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) (which must be provided at a registered HBOT facility), music therapy, and service animal training therapy. Veterans qualify for the preceding treatments if they have been diagnosed by a health practitioner (any licensed Chapter 464 nurse) with service-connected PTSD or TBI.
• In January 2013, Texas revised its position statement 1523, “fte Use of Complementary Modalities by the LVN or RN,” which contains specific mention of CAM as long as the proper credentials (e.g., license, certification, registration) are held to safely engage in specific practices where applicable.
• New York has its practice information on CAM titled “Complementary/Alternative Medicine/Therapies (CAM).”

Acupuncture Scope of Practice for Advanced Registered Nurse Practitioners Advisory Opinion” and approved it with one revision in November 2017. fte advi- sory opinion provides a roadmap for APRNs who are interested in incorporating acupuncture techniques into their nursing practice.
• In December 2017, Minnesota reaffirmed and
adopted a statement of “Accountability for Utilization of Integrative fterapies in Nursing Practice” with only minor technical changes.
• In 2015, Kentucky adopted an Advisory Opinion
authorizing APRNs with formal education to perform acupuncture.
• In 2015, Massachusetts revised its advisory ruling
number 9801 for the scope of practice for RNs and LPNs on holistic nursing and the incorporation of CIHA.
• In 2000, California adopted a position statement about
holistic nursing titled “Complementary and Alternative
• 
North Dakota has a broad definition of nursing,
encompassing holistic nursing and CAM, as well as a specific practice statement titled “Complementary and Alternative fterapies.”

   fte most recent reviews of legal parameters of nurses and CIHA were by Denner (2007) and Radzyminski (2007). Five legal questions that APNs can use to assist them in considering the appropriate use of a CIHA are listed in Box 17.12.
   Patients and families are bringing CIHA approaches into the acute health setting, which is natural because CHIA usage is increasing. Nurses, and especially APNs, are both trusted and in a unique position to advocate for their patients’ usage of these approaches while promoting safety in the patient’s plan of care. A legal FAQ for holistic nurses is maintained on the AHNA Web site that has application to all APNs who use CIHA.





Legal Questions Regarding the Appropriate
     Use of CIHA by APNs
1. Is the CIHA approach within the scope of nurs- ing practicing? APN practice has overlapping roles and functions with medicine. ftis could be a problem. A firm grounding in nursing theory and nursing diagnosis can add clarity.
2. Are the standards of care for CIHA clear? Consider risk management guidelines of the institution and state NPAs.
3. Is the CIHA approach in accord with the guidelines of the NPA in the state where the nurse practices?
4. Has the CIHA been limited to another disci- pline? Some disciplines have their own licen- sure (e.g., chiropractic might limit the nurse’s practice of craniosacral therapy).
5. Does the state in which the nurse practices limit nutrition and supplement counseling or prohibit prescribing over-the-counter (OTC) herbals and/or supplements? APNs with pre- scriptive authority are often the only nurses qualified to prescribe OTC herbals and/or supplements.
The APN, Holistic Nursing Research, and CIHA
fte holistic nursing and CIHA research base has grown substantially in recent years. Graduate nursing programs have supported research focused on both theory devel- opment and the evaluation of approaches. In 2016, the AHNA Research Committee completed a 5-year review with annotated bibliography of all aspects of holistic nursing as part of the background data and information for the third edition of the Holistic Nursing: Scope and Standards (2019).
   It is imperative that APNs become aware of the evidence and precautions derived from research to make informed choices about using any approach or encour- aging their clients to do so. fte AHNA Web site has an ever-growing research section that includes articles, a Web

library, a glossary of terms, and many other resources for those wishing to do holistic nursing research (https:// www.AHNA.org/research). For specific case studies, refer to this chapter’s bibliography located online.

Role Development With Avenues and Models for APNs as Holistic and CIH Practitioners
Increasingly nurses are becoming independent CIH or holistic practitioners. In 2016, an issue of Beginnings focused on advanced practice holistic nursing with topics including creating a holistic graduate nursing curricu- lum (Shields & Weaver, 2016); leaders in implementing core values (Rosa & Lubansky, 2016); the emerging role of AHNs (Hines, 2016); increasing patient health out- comes (Wylie, 2016); envisioning the future of advanced practice (Hines & McCaffrey, 2016); advanced holistic nursing certification (Erickson & Sandor, 2016); and nurse coaching for APNs (McElligott, 2016).
   fte AHNA bimonthly Beginnings is progressive in its themes, both current and future, pertaining to holistic nursing and CIHA. Health coaching became a role with a scope and standards of practice for the holistic nurse, and the August 2015 Beginnings was devoted to holistic health coaching. In October 2016 the issue centered on the holistic nurse entrepreneur, whereas in December 2018 the issue looked at holistic nurses on boards, an ini- tiative that was later developed and implemented across nursing specialties. fte February 2019 issue focused on holistic advanced care, and in August 2019 the theme was enlightened leadership.
As APNs interested in developing CIHA practices
or delivering holistic nursing interventions, we must take responsibility for obtaining the necessary educa- tion, experience, and (when appropriate) certification. As you can see, Beginnings is an exceptional resource to assist the APN to become more current on CIH approaches and to keep current on changing and developing issues.
   As our role develops and expands, APNs may be involved in situations where patients have a choice between a conventional practitioner or a holistic/CIHA practitioner. If APNs recommend CIHA, they need to know which approaches are safe and effective for a spe- cific patient’s plan of care and the patient’s condition.




Tips for Expanding and Advancing CIHA in Conventional Health Care• Acquire and maintain current knowledge and competency in holistic nursing practice, including CIHA and other approaches inte- grated within holistic nursing practice.
• Provide care and guidance to persons through
nursing interventions and approaches consis- tent with research findings and other sound evidence.
• Adhere to a professional code of ethics to pro-
mote healing that seeks to preserve wholeness and dignity of self and others.
• Recognize each person as a whole: body-mind-
spirit in an ever-changing environment.
• Assess each person holistically, using appropri- ate conventional and holistic approaches.
• Create a plan of care in collaboration with the
person and their significant others, if they wish, consistent with their cultural background, health beliefs, gender identity, sexual orientation, values, and preferences that focuses on health promo- tion, recovery or restoration, or peaceful dying so that the person is as independent as possible.



Box 17.13 contains questions that APNs can use as a guide when considering recommending CIHA to patients.
   Many approaches are elective and can be integrated into conventional care, which increases the person and family’s comfort and feeling of control over their health care. To integrate CIHA into conventional health care enables clients to benefit from the best of all approaches available. Box 17.14 lists the six elements essential for providing safe and effective holistic patient care.

Holistic Ethical Considerations
As APNs, our nursing choices and action must accord with the ANA Code of Ethics for Nurses with Interpretative

Based on American Holistic Nurses Association. (2016). AHNA: Position on the role of nurses in the practice of complementary and integrative health approaches (CIHA). Used by permission prior to publication on Web site; American Holistic Nurses Association. (2019). Holistic nursing: Scope and standards of practice (3rd ed.).


Statements (ANA, 2015). fte AHNA also has a position statement on holistic nursing ethics located in Appendix B of the Holistic Nursing: Scope and Standards of Practice (ANA & AHNA, 2013; ANA & AHNA, 2019, p. 255)
that outlines the holistic nurse’s ethical responsibilities.
   In order to provide services to others, a holistic nurse has a responsibility to self, the client, coworkers, nursing practice, the profession of nursing, society, and the environment as summarized next:
• Nurses and self: . . . a responsibility to model health- care behaviors and achieve harmony in their own lives and assist others striving to do the same.



• Nurses and the client: . . . primary responsibility is to the client needing nursing care . . . seeing the client whole and providing care that is professionally appro- priate and culturally consonant . . . confidentially . . . relationship guided by mutual respect. . . .
• Nurses and coworkers: maintain cooperative relation-
ships . . . responsible to nurture each other and assist as team . . . if career endangered by coworker . . . take appropriate actions.
• Nurses and nursing practice: . . . personal responsi-
bility for practice and maintaining continued com- petence . . . right to use all appropriate nursing interventions . . . obligation to determine efficacy and safety of all nursing actions . . . as applicable use re- search findings in directing practice.
• Nurses and the profession: . . . play a role in determin-
ing and implementing desirable standards of nursing practice, education, and research . . . assume leader- ship position to guide the profession toward a holistic philosophy of practices . . . support nursing research and development of holistically oriented nursing the- ories . . . participate in establishing and maintaining equitable social and economic working conditions.
• Nurses and society: . . . along with other citizens . . .
responsibility . . . initiating and supporting actions to meet health and social needs of all society.
• Nurses and the environment: strive to create (a support-
ive) client environment . . . peace, harmony, and nur- turance so that healing may take place . . . Consider ecosystem health in relation to the need for health, safety, and peace of all persons.
   In essence, holistic nurses further recognize and honor the ethic that the patient is the authority on his or her own health experience. fte holistic nurse is an “option giver” who helps the patient develop an understanding of alternatives and implications of various health and treat- ment options. Holistic nurses embrace a professional ethic of caring and healing. It is an ethic that seeks to preserve the

dignity and wholeness of themselves and others (ANA & AHNA, 2013, p. 10–11).
   Within holistic ethics there is a basic underlying con- cept of unity and the integral wholeness of all people and of all nature. ftis integral wholeness is identified and pursued by finding unity and wholeness within the self and within humanity. It is very important to note that “acts are not performed for the sake of law, precedent, or social norms, but rather from a desire to do good freely in order to witness, identify and contribute to unity” (ANA & AHNA, 2013, p. 89).

SUMMARY


A few times in the history of our planet, huge resets have occurred. fte Ice Age, major wars that involve entire continents, and now a very small virus have affected everyone. So how do we move forward as people, as nurses, and as advanced practice nurses?
   Times are rapidly changing. And as nurses, we are trained to assess, plan, implement, evaluate, change, and keep improving. We are the change agents; we have crit- ical skills necessary to assist others to regain their health. At a time where not touching is the norm, we touch because we give care, hands-on care.
   Holism recognizes the innate wholeness of each per- son as they interact with and react to both their inner environment and the larger outer environment. fte challenge remains to keep the holistic focus on ourselves as well as on others. Maintaining healthy wholeness for the nurse is an important part of this holistic balance.
   APNs can affect the entire health-care system one per- son at a time. Because of nursing’s holistic legacy, APNs have grounds to adopt a strong commitment to holism and CIHA. Looking at the whole person, a body-mind- spirit in an ever-changing environment, APNs can partic- ipate in creating a future that expands to heal yourself, the patient, their family, the community, and even the planet.















Basic Skills for Teaching and the Advanced Practice Nurse
Christina Leonard, Valerie Sabol, and Marilyn H. Oermann



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Describe the teaching process as it relates to educating patients, nurses, students, and other learners.
• Examine the educational process from assessment of learning needs through
instruction and evaluation.
• Select teaching and learning activities to support cognitive, affective, and psychomotor learning.
• Describe a variety of teaching methods for use with patients, nurses, students,
and other learners.
• Identify methods for both formative and summative evaluation.
• Explain the role of the advanced practice nurse (APN) as educator.











306



INTRODUCTION

In today’s health-care environment, the APN serves a critical role in educating patients, nurses, students, and other learners. Patient education is an important part of managing the patient’s care to achieve optimal outcomes. ftrough this education, patients gain an understanding of their health problems and treatments, how to care for themselves at home, and health-promoting behaviors. By learning about their conditions and treatment op- tions, patients can participate more fully in health-care decisions.
   Teaching patients and their families, however, is only one educational role of the APN. In many settings, the APN also teaches staff, assisting them in developing the knowledge and skills essential for providing care, keep- ing them up-to-date with advances in clinical practice, and mentoring nurses in the practice setting, ultimately improving the quality of patient care. For some APNs the educator role extends to nursing students with the APN serving as a preceptor to nursing students, guiding their learning in the practice setting and teaching stu- dents in schools of nursing.
   fte purpose of this chapter is to describe the qualities of an effective teacher in nursing, the educational process from assessment of learning needs through evaluation, teaching methods, and the role of the APN as educa- tor. fte chapter provides an overview of these topics as a way of preparing the APN for teaching patients, staff, students, and others.

FRAMEWORK FOR TEACHING

Every APN needs an understanding of the concepts of learning and teaching. ftese concepts provide a frame- work to use when making educational decisions.

Learning
Learning is a process of gaining new knowledge and skills because of experiences in which the learner en- gages. ftese experiences may be planned activities in- tended to guide the learner in acquiring this knowledge and these skills, or they may be unplanned experiences that lead to a new understanding. Learning may result

in an overt and measurable change in behavior, such as patients’ ability to perform a procedure after teaching by the APN; or the outcomes of learning may not be readily apparent, such as gaining a new perspective on a chronic illness or insight about one’s own condition. In the latter cases, although learning has occurred, it may be more difficult to assess outcomes.

Teaching
Teaching is a series of planned actions to facilitate learn- ing. Teaching is not merely giving information, although that might be included in the process. Instead, teaching is identifying individual learning needs, setting goals in collaboration with the learner, planning learning activi- ties that guide the learner toward meeting those goals, assessing the learner’s progress, and determining where further learning is indicated (Oermann et al., 2018). Teaching is facilitating learning by actively involving and engaging the learner. Rather than telling a nurse what care to provide, the APN teacher asks higher-level questions about the patient to guide the nurse in thinking through possible options before deciding on interventions.

Qualities of Effective Teachers in Nursing
Research conducted over the years has established the qualities of an effective teacher in nursing, particularly for teaching in the clinical setting. fte findings of this research are significant because they identify important behaviors that promote learning as well as behaviors and actions that impede learning. Effective teachers have five predominant qualities: (a) expert knowledge, (b) clinical competence, (c) teaching skills, (d) positive relationships with learners, and (e) personal characteristics. Table 18.1 describes these qualities in more detail.

ASSESSMENT OF LEARNER


fte teaching process begins with an assessment of learn- ing needs and other determinants of learning; and it pro- gresses through planning the education, teaching, and evaluating outcomes. fte process, however, is not linear; teaching does not necessarily start with assessment and end with evaluation. For example, the APN may plan a


   Table 18.1	
Five Qualities of Effective Teachers

QualityDetailsExpert knowledgeHas expertise in content area to be taught
Is up-to-date with interventions, treatments, and new developments in that area
Is aware of and able to translate current research findings and evidence into clinical practiceClinical competenceIs an expert in clinical practice and in the specialty being taught
Has expert clinical, technical, and other skills essential for care of patients in a specialty area Uses sound clinical judgmentTeaching skillsKnows how to teach different groups of learners (patients, nurses, students, and other learners) Assesses learning needs and bases instruction on those needs
Explains ideas clearly at a level each learner can understand
Asks thought-provoking questions that promote higher-level thinking and clinical judgment Effectively demonstrates procedures and technical skills
Evaluates learners fairly and gives prompt, specific, and instructional feedbackPositive relationshipsHas strong interpersonal skills and an understanding of the importance of communication in the educational process
Develops a supportive learning environment that recognizes individual differences among learners Communicates effectively with those involved in the educational processPersonal characteristicsHas enthusiasm for teaching, patience, a sense of humor, friendliness, and willingness to admit mistakes

program for staff education following a needs assessment but then realize at the start of the program that most of the nurses lack the knowledge base for understand- ing the new content. ftis in turn suggests that different content should be presented to assist staff in gaining the prerequisite knowledge.

Assessment of Learning Needs
Assessment is the first step in teaching because it deter- mines the learner’s present knowledge and skills, which may influence their ability to learn new information and gain new skills. Assessment reveals gaps in learning; and, generally, the educator should first provide instruction to “fill these gaps” and ensure that learners have the prereq- uisite knowledge and skills to understand the new con- tent. Questions that guide assessment of learning needs are highlighted in Box 18.1.
   Learners frequently have more needs than the time and resources for teaching allow. fterefore, the APN



     Assessing Learning Needs
What does the learner already know about the content?
What competencies does the learner already have? Is this knowledge and are those competencies suf-
ficient to learn the new content?
Based on this information and the objectives or outcomes to be achieved, what should be taught?
prioritizes the learning needs, focusing the education on the essential knowledge and skills for self-care if teach- ing patients and for safe, effective practice if teaching staff. For example, the mother of a toddler recently diag- nosed with asthma needs to know the warning signs of an asthma episode and how to manage them, her child’s



asthma medications, the correct use of inhalers, asthma triggers for her child and how to prevent them, and when to seek treatment. ftese are immediate learning needs and should be the priorities for teaching.
   ftere also is limited time for staff education, and the APN needs to focus on knowledge and skills essential for safe and competent practice. What are the most com- mon practice problems new graduates and nursing staff are likely to encounter? What content must be learned to understand those problems and provide effective nursing care? What knowledge and competencies are required for safe care of patients? Once these essential learning needs are met, the APN can extend the education to other ar- eas of learning. Many APNs also serve as preceptors to nursing students or teach in a school of nursing in addi- tion to their clinical practice. ftese same concepts about focusing the education on essential knowledge and com- petencies apply to teaching students as well.

Assessment of Readiness to Learn
A second area to assess is the learner’s readiness to learn. Readiness is the point in time when the learner demon- strates an interest in learning and is able to participate in the teaching process (Bastable, 2019). fte learner must be ready physically, psychologically, and cognitively to engage in learning; otherwise, learning will not occur, regardless of the importance of the content and skills.
   In assessing physical readiness, the APN focuses on whether the learner has the physical ability to learn the skill. For example, a patient must have a certain degree of strength to learn to transfer from the bed to a wheelchair. Health status and timing also affect physical readiness because they often influence the energy that the learner has to engage in learning and their degree of comfort. A patient who is in acute pain following a surgical proce- dure or who is fatigued because of a treatment may not have the energy to learn and may be too uncomfortable to participate. Teaching the family or planning for a follow-up telehealth video conference visit or telephone call may be more appropriate.
Psychological readiness includes the degree of anxiety
and stress experienced by the learner, their motivation to learn, and their developmental stage. fte learner needs to be able to focus on learning and to be actively involved in it. fte stress associated with the diagnosis of a serious

health problem, the fear of losing one’s job because of ill- ness, and/or the concern about not being successful in an educational program may influence a person’s readiness to learn. In assessing psychological readiness, it is im- portant to determine whether the learner is emotionally ready to engage in learning.
   Motivation is the desire of an individual to learn— the drive to gain new knowledge and skills or to change a behavior. Differences in motivation to learn between staff and students are often apparent in the effort they give to learning, their desire to achieve at a high level of performance rather than meet minimal expectations, and their willingness to engage in remedial learning and prac- tice. Motivation may change over time and with different learning situations. Strategies for motivating learners as part of the educational process are presented in Box 18.2. Readiness to learn also is determined by the learner’s developmental stage. Pediatric nurses are well aware of differences in how children learn based on their ages and development. Knowledge of growth and development guides the APN in determining the complexity and out- comes of learning and the types of teaching strategies
that are appropriate.
   Cognitive readiness relates to the knowledge base of the learner—whether the learner has the prerequisite knowledge and skills. ftis is a critical area of assessment, particularly for content and competencies that build on one another. When learners lack the prerequisites, it is up to the APN to guide them to resources and learning activities they can complete on their own or with the APN’s guidance or supervision. Assessment of cognitive readiness also allows the APN to determine if the learner has already mastered the outcomes and competencies and is ready to progress to a new area of learning.

Other Assessment Areas
Other areas to assess depend on the educational situation and the type of learner. In teaching patients and fami- lies, the APN should be aware of their culture, cultural values, and culture-specific health-care practices and how these might influence their education (Ashton & Oermann, 2014; Bastable, 2019; McCleary-Jones, 2016; Sidhu et al., 2015). Another important area for assessment is the patient’s and family’s health literacy. Health literacy is the ability of an individual to find,





Strategies for Motivating Learners as Part
     of Teaching
Teach for the learner based on the learner’s needs, not the educator’s needs.
Teach when ready to learn or develop alternate strategies, such as teaching family members and caregivers or planning for follow-up visits (in person or via telehealth or telephone).
Set small and attainable outcomes so that learners can meet them.
Focus the learner’s attention on important out- comes and critical knowledge and skills to be learned.
Explain why this content and these skills are important.
Divide information to be learned into small seg- ments, organize them logically, and teach only the amount learners can retain at a time.
Provide frequent positive reinforcement (e.g., praise for correct answers and accurate perfor- mance of skills).
Give prompt and specific feedback at the time of learning, clarifying incorrect responses and er- rors in performance and reteaching as needed. Allow for practice of skills so that the learner develops competency and confidence in their
own abilities.
Review and refresh essential content and skills periodically to improve long-term retention.
read, and understand health information to make ap- propriate health-care decisions (Brega et al., 2015). An earlier national survey found that 88% of adults in the United States did not have sufficient health-literacy skills to navigate the health-care system, and 36% had limited health literacy (Kutner et al., 2006). With limited health literacy, patients have difficulty following directions in written patient education materials, discharge instruc- tions, and prescriptions for medications.
   Limited health literacy prevents patients, and the general public, from evaluating information they find on the Internet to determine if it is accurate and reliable and

whether it comes from a reputable source. Because the Internet is a leading source of health-care information for consumers, the ability to evaluate information on Web sites is critical. A systematic review of the quality of health information on the Internet revealed that much of the information was of poor quality and was not reli- able (Daraz et al., 2019). APNs should consider making a list of reputable Web sites available for their patients.
  ftere are many tools and measures for evaluating patients’ health literacy. fte APN can search for tools at the Health Literacy Tool Shed (http://healthliteracy
.bu.edu/). ftis is an online database of measures of health literacy that includes an explanation of the measure and detailed information about its psychometric properties. fte Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has a comprehensive Web site on health literacy with many guidelines of value to APNs and other nurses in- volved in patient and health education (https://www
.cdc.gov/healthliteracy/).
   Assessment of health literacy allows APNs to tailor their patient education so that individuals can under- stand the information they are taught or that they access later. Welvers and colleagues (2020) emphasized that teaching should be delivered in a clear and simple way using plain language (not medical terminology, unless the nurse is assured of patient understanding), explain- ing content slowly, and inviting questions from patients and caregivers to assess their understanding. Another ef- fective strategy to assess patient understanding is teach- back, periodically asking patients to teach the nurse what they just learned. Teach-back is effective in improving patients’ understanding of health information (Tran et al., 2019). In a survey of more than 300 health-care providers, both nurses and other providers reported high rates of clarifying information and ability to correct patient and family misunderstandings when they used teach-back (Klingbeil & Gibson, 2018).
Finally, it is important for the APN to address social
determinants of health (SDOH) with learners. SDOH are the conditions in which people are born, learn, live, play, work, age, and worship (Office of Disease Preven- tion and Health Promotion [ODPHP], 2020). Healthy People 2020 identified five key areas related to SDOH: economic stability, education, health and health care, neighborhood and environment, and social and com- munity context. ftese key areas take into consideration



a number of underlying factors. Economic stability ad- dresses employment, food insecurity, housing, socioeco- nomic status, and poverty. Education refers to the highest level of education completed by the learner. Health and health care relate to access to health care and health lit- eracy, and neighborhood and environment consider ac- cess to food, the safety of a neighborhood, housing, and environmental conditions. fte social and community context considers civic participation, discrimination, incarceration, and social cohesion (ODPHP, 2020). For teaching to be effective, providers need to consider pa- tients’ individualized situations, such as a patient’s ability to afford certain food choices and their ability to access grocery stores when teaching about diet and nutrition.

Strategies for Assessment
Questioning Learners
One of the most effective strategies for assessment is questioning learners about their understanding of the content and what they believe are their educational needs. For patient education, considering the limited time available for teaching, it is important that questions focus on key areas for patients to understand their health problems, treatments, and self-care.
   Questions for assessment need to be open ended and probing to be effective. Asking patients, “Do you have any questions about your asthma?” is of limited value in assessing their understanding of asthma and self-care. A more effective line of questioning is, “Tell me about the medications you are taking for your asthma and whether they are helping. What problems are you still having, and what are you doing about them?” Using open-ended and higher-level questions is particularly important when assessing the learning needs of staff and students. Learners may be able to answer questions that ask for recall of facts and specific information but be unable to answer those that require application to new situations, analytical thinking, and clinical judgment. By asking different levels of questions, the APN can identify more clearly the actual learning needs.
Pretests
Quizzes and pretests given before an educational pro- gram provide an effective means of assessing learning needs. By using pretest results, the APN can determine

the content already mastered and identify gaps in learning that become the focus of the instruction. An advantage of using written tests is the opportunity to ad- minister both a pretest and posttest, for example, with a continuing education program, in-service session, or workshop, as a means of evaluating the effectiveness of the instruction and educational program. Often, pretests are done verbally with the APN asking focused questions to determine what has already been learned and decide what to review before teaching new content or skills.
Observations
ftere is no better means of assessing psychomotor and technical skills than by observing the learner per- forming them. Ideally, the APN should observe perfor- mance more than once, providing feedback about the performance.
Motivational Interviewing
Motivational interviewing is a strategy that engages the learner to make health behavior improvements or changes. ftis guided approach is patient centered and goal directed. Successful motivational interviewing can be guided by employing the OARS acronym, which in- cludes utilization of the following interaction strategies: open-ended questions, affirmations, reflective listening, and summarizing (Family Planning National Training Center, 2016). Application of this approach will help learners determine what motivates them and place the behavior change or goal in the hands of the learner.

PLANNING THE EDUCATION


ftis chapter provides an overview of educating patients, nurses, students, and other learners. However, not all of the content in the chapter is appropriate for each of these groups of learners. ftis section of the chapter describes an educational plan and its components. Whereas APNs might develop an educational plan for a group of pa- tients or for educating the community about a health topic, they would not use this formal plan for patient education. In most cases, educational materials are inte- grated in the electronic health record (EHR), and APNs can search for these to guide their teaching and to add to the online patient portal as resources for patients. For



continuing education, workshops, and other similar pro- grams, APNs may be asked to develop a written educa- tional plan, but at minimum they need to understand its role in guiding what and how they teach. If the APN is teaching in a program where the educational plan was developed by someone else, that plan indicates content that the APN should teach and the methods to use in the instruction.
   Although teaching often occurs without a written plan, having a plan for the education is useful because it specifies the intended learning outcomes or competen- cies to be developed, the content to teach, the teaching methods and learner activities (to meet those outcomes), the time allotted for the instruction, and the strategies for evaluating if learning has occurred. When offering an educational program for a group of learners, such as an in-service program, a written plan guides the APN in the depth of content to present and the teaching meth- ods to be used within the time frame. For programs that provide contact hours for continuing education, written plans are required, and the organization offering the con- tact hours specifies the form to be used.
ftere are many formats for developing written plans
for education. Generally, they include at least six com- ponents that relate to one another: (a) the purpose of the educational program or session, (b) the objectives or outcomes to be met, (c) an outline of the content,
(d) the teaching methods for presenting the content and activities for learners to do, (e) the time frame for the instruction, and (f ) the evaluation methods.
   fte content should be organized logically from sim- ple to complex with prerequisite content presented first. fte extent of content to include depends on the objec- tives and the amount of time allotted for the instruction. If there is only a limited time available, the goal is to present the content that is critical to foster achievement of the outcomes. fte content is usually listed on the teaching plan in outline format with sufficient detail for other educators to know what to teach and in what or- der. If only a brief outline is required in the setting, the APN can develop a more detailed one for personal use in delivering the instruction.
fte next component of the plan is a list of the teach-
ing methods, the methods the APN will use to help learners achieve the outcomes and gain the knowledge and skills they need. Methods should be appropriate for

the content to be presented and for achieving the ob- jectives. fte type of learner—patients, nurses, students, and other learners; the size of the group; and the time frame also influence the selection of teaching methods.
   For patient education, discussion, handouts, visual aids, and demonstration are effective because they lend themselves to one-to-one instruction and allow the APN to individualize the teaching to the particular needs of the patient. With students and staff, there are many teaching methods from which to choose, but some, such as written assignments, are more appropriate for stu- dents than staff.
  fte group size is significant in that some methods, such as discussion and demonstration, are best used for individual instruction and with small groups, whereas others, such as lecture, are useful for larger groups. Along the same lines, some strategies are more time consum- ing to implement. For example, small group activities add time to the instruction compared with presenting content in a lecture format, but activities such as these might be critical considering the outcomes to be met and for high-risk, low-frequency clinical events. In plan- ning the teaching methods, the APN can also identify any specific learning activities to be used, for example, students might be asked to practice selected skills with a peer prior to checkoff.
fte next component of the educational plan speci-
fies the time frame for the instruction. fte time allotted for teaching determines the depth and complexity of the content and also influences the selection of teaching strategies. fte APN should carefully plan the content to avoid running out of time and to include essential information that the learner needs. fte plan should in- clude resources for learners, for example, Web sites and handouts that may be helpful for additional review and reinforcement of learning.
  fte last component is the evaluation methods used to measure achievement of the outcomes. Evaluation may be formative, providing feedback to learners on their progress in meeting the objectives, or summative, measuring achievement of the outcomes of learning. Evaluation methods are described later in this chapter. Table 18.2 provides a sample educational plan devel- oped for a continuing education program; this can be used as a template for the development of these plans by the APN.


   Table 18.2	
Sample Educational Plan
Continuing Education Offering Documentation Form Title of Session: Clinical Teaching and Evaluation
Purpose: Examine a variety of clinical teaching and evaluation methods for use in nursing education.


Objectives
ContentTime FrameTeaching Methods and Learning ActivitiesEvaluation Methods1. Examine varied clinical teaching methods and related evidence.I. Lack of evidence base for clinical teaching
II. Guidelines for good clinical teaching
III. Clinical teaching methods
A. Patient assignment
B. Higher level questions and what research shows
C. Case method
D. Unfolding cases
E. Short papers for clinical courses and why use them
F. Conferences
G. Media clips
H. Others1 hourLecture, discussion, PowerPoint, handouts, examples, small group work: develop each clinical teaching method and share with large groupQuestions, review of clinical teaching methods2. Describe clinical evaluation methods and principles for assessing clinical performance in nursing.I. Framework for evaluating clinical performance
II. Methods for assessing clinical competencies
A. Observation of performance and need for recording observations
B. Problems with observations
C. Rating forms to demonstrate varied models, validity, reliability, and other standards
D. Preparing teachers to rate performance: what can be done?
E. Multiple assessment methods
III. Summary and evaluation1 hourLecture, discussion, PowerPoint, handouts; role play (teacher observing student performance and giving feedback on it), video clips: observe performance and rate using formsQuestions, feedback during discussions of video clips, self- assessment

Objectives or Outcomes
Objectives reflect the outcomes of learning—the cognitive, affective, and psychomotor skills and values to be attained by the learner. fte objectives also guide the selection of content and teaching methods. Evaluation then deter- mines the extent to which learners have met the outcomes, or are in the process of meeting them, and where further learning is indicated (Oermann & Gaberson, 2021).
  
Objectives specify who the learners are and what they will know or be able to do at the end of the instruction. For example, “fte staff nurse identifies nursing inter- ventions with supporting evidence for care of patients in heart failure” is an objective. Objectives should be clear, measurable, and attainable, considering the level of the learner and time frame allotted for the instruc- tion. Behaviors such as list, identify, apply, and compare are measurable in contrast to terms such as know and



understand. fte time frame for teaching also dictates the number of objectives and their complexity.
Domains of Learning
ftere are three domains, or areas, of learning: cognitive, psychomotor, and affective. Objectives may be written in each of these domains.
Cognitive Domain.
Learning in the cognitive domain relates to the acqui- sition of knowledge and development of higher-level thinking skills, such as problem-solving and clinical judgment. In many teaching situations, the outcome of learning is memorizing facts and specific information; at other times, the goals are learning to apply concepts to new situations, to analyze complex data about patients, to arrive at decisions about patient problems considering alternative possibilities, and to make judgments about the most appropriate course of action. ftose are higher- level cognitive skills.
   fte taxonomy of the cognitive domain enables the educator to organize the learning outcomes in a logical way from memorization to increasingly more complex cognitive skills such as evaluating and creating. ftere are six levels in the cognitive taxonomy, beginning with remembering or recalling specific facts and information (the lowest) and progressing through understanding, ap- plying, analyzing, evaluating, and creating (Anderson & Krathwohl, 2001; Bloom et al., 1956). A definition and sample objective for each of the six levels of the revised cognitive taxonomy are found in Table 18.3.
Psychomotor Domain
Psychomotor learning results in the development of motor skills, the ability to perform technical proce- dures, and other competencies that involve physical co- ordination. In developing psychomotor skills, learners progress through different phases: cognitive (learning about the skill and how to perform it), associative (re- fining movements until they become more consistent), and autonomous (practicing the skill until it can be per- formed automatically without thinking about each step) (Kardong-Edgren et al., 2019; Schmidt & Lee, 2005). In teaching skills, these phases are important to keep in mind. In the cognitive phase, learners are attempting to understand the skill and how to accurately perform it. In this phase, questions from the APN about the rationale


   Table 18.3	
Cognitive Taxonomy and Sample Objectives

Levels of Cognitive Taxonomy
Sample ObjectiveRemembering: Ability to recall facts and specific informationThe patient identifies side effects of medications.Understanding: Ability to understand and explain informationThe nurse explains the underlying
pathophysiology of the patient’s condition.Applying: Ability to useThe student plansknowledge in a newinterventions for criticallysituation and applyill patients that are basedconcepts and theories toon current evidence.practiceAnalyzing: Ability to identify relevant parts and their relationshipsThe manager analyzes the outcomes of the
new staffing pattern on patients and nursing staff.Evaluating: Ability to arriveThe student evaluatesat judgments based onresearch studies on theinternal and externaluse of relaxation forcriteriaadults with chronic pain.Creating: Ability to develop a new productThe nurse designs a protocol for pain management.
for the skill and its underlying principles are appropriate. However, in the other phases in which learners are devel- oping and refining their performance of the skill itself, the teacher should not ask questions about the “why” of the skill. As learners are developing their skill, they focus on the technique, and questions about rationale can ac- tually impede learning.
   Progressing through these phases of learning and de- veloping motor skills requires deliberate practice. Prac- ticing a skill one time is generally not sufficient to retain the skill and achieve mastery in its performance. Delib- erate practice is the repetitive practice of a skill combined with feedback from an expert, such as the APN, to guide performance (Johnson et al., 2019; Kardong-Edgren et al., 2019; Muret-Wagstaff et al., 2020; Oermann et al., 2016; Welch & Carter, 2018). ftis feedback



ensures that the learner knows how to perform the skill. Learners can then practice the skill on their own to build their expertise and self-confidence. Although objectives can be written for psychomotor learning, in most situa- tions, skills are taught following a checklist of the steps of the procedure or guidelines on performing the skill. Deliberate practice is valuable for mastering other skills too, such as developing competency in communication (Yeh et al., 2019).
Affective Domain
In some educational situations, the APN assists learners in developing values important in professional practice. Value development in this context builds on an under- standing of the values and beliefs that are essential to practice as a professional, such as confidentiality and pri- vacy. From this knowledge base, learners need to then accept these values and beliefs as their own and inter- nalize them as a basis for their own professional practice (Oermann & Gaberson, 2021). In most teaching situa- tions, the APN would not specify values to be taught to patients and other learners in the form of objectives but would be aware of these outcomes when planning the instruction.
Using Outcomes to Guide Teaching
In planning the content and selecting appropriate teach- ing methods, the APN should consider the level of learn- ing to be achieved as a result of the instruction. If the outcome of learning is to recall facts, the teaching meth- ods could be lecture, discussion, and readings. When the outcome is to use the knowledge gained from the instruction to decide on the most effective nursing inter- ventions for a patient (applying) or to determine the pri- ority problem (analyzing), the teaching methods need to extend beyond lecture and discussion. For example, with the latter outcomes of learning, the APN might develop a short case in which the learner applies the concepts to a patient scenario or might have a discussion with staff about how to manage a patient’s care, considering the evidence on interventions that might be used.

Teaching Methods
Many teaching methods are available for use in educat- ing patients, students, and staff. ftis section presents several of these methods. fte goal is to choose methods

that facilitate achievement of the outcomes and that are appropriate for the learner. fte APN should be aware of different teaching methods that can be used and the evidence on their effectiveness (Oermann, 2018).
Lecture
Lecture is a structured means of presenting information to a group. In recent years, with the focus on higher-level thinking and active learning, there has been a shift away from lecture, in which students are often passive partic- ipants. However, a lecture that synthesizes from multi- ple sources, is well organized, is delivered with skill, and allows for questions and open discussion is an effective method for presenting a large body of content in a short period. Lectures can be efficient in that the teacher can emphasize key points to learn and can integrate different sources of information not available to the learners. To promote thinking and higher-level learning, the teacher can include examples that apply content from the lecture to clinical situations and can ask questions about alterna- tive perspectives and different possibilities (Oermann & Gaberson, 2021). By adapting the traditional lecture with minimal learner involvement to an interactive for- mat with open-ended questions and discussion, lecture can be used for higher-level learning.
A lecture begins with an introduction that presents
the objectives to be met, an overview of the content, and a rationale for why this information is important. fte content presented during the lecture should reflect a syn- thesis from multiple sources of information rather than repeating what could be read in an article or a textbook. fte intent of the lecture is to synthesize from resources not available to learners. Content should be clear and organized logically, beginning with simple concepts and progressing to more complex ones, consistent with the outline in the plan for the education. Questions and clinical examples integrated throughout the lecture allow for higher-level learning and actively involve the partici- pants. Small group activities within the lecture at the end serve a similar purpose and also encourage collaborative learning. fte lecture should end with a summary that reviews the main points and, for students and staff, their relevance to clinical practice.
fte use of pictures, video clips, and other types of
multimedia in the lecture provides for visualization of the content, allows the APN to highlight key points as



the lecture progresses, and adds variety to the presenta- tion. Some nursing programs have transitioned from the use of lectures to more active learning methods, such as flipped classrooms, in which students complete preclass activities and then engage in problem-based learning in class. But APNs still need to have skill in lecturing. Even in a flipped classroom model, the preclass learn- ing activities typically include viewing recorded lectures. In continuing education and in-service programs, and in presentations that the APN might give at a confer- ence, lecture is generally used for part if not all of the presentation. Some important principles for developing effective presentations are shown in Box 18.3. In addi- tion, there are many Web sites on developing and using PowerPoint and incorporating technology in presenta- tions. Woodring and Hultquist (2017) recommended that other strategies such as discussion, small group activities, and role play be used in class in addition to

lecture. ftese other activities then engage students and keep them actively involved. Inexperienced teachers should practice their lectures and presentations prior to the event. ftis helps refine the presentation and ensure that the timing is appropriate.
Discussion
Discussion is an exchange of ideas between teacher and learner to meet an educational goal (Oermann et al., 2018). fte intent of a discussion is for learners to ex- press their views, not to provide a forum for APNs to express their own. Both teacher and learner should ac- tively participate.
   Discussions are particularly valuable for students and staff to express their feelings and beliefs about a situation, to examine values that influence patient care and their interactions with others, and to explore ethi- cal issues. Discussions also are effective for encouraging



box 18.3Guidelines for Presentations (Lectures, Speeches, and Other Types)Identify Learners and Outcomes to Be Met	Develop clinical scenarios and examples of how con- Know your learners and their background.		tent applies to practice; integrate these throughout If presenting to learners about whom you have lim-		the presentation, use for small group work, or save
ited information, review materials that describe	for the end of the presentation if the presentation
the educational program and ask program plan-	is finished early.
ners about learners.	Review key points at the end.
Review objectives for presentation.	If using PowerPoint, check that each slide presents one idea and begins with a clear title; use key words, short
Plan Presentation	phrases, and visuals rather than too much text; make
Plan content to meet outcomes, considering learners	sure that the font is large enough, at least 24-point and time allotted.	or larger, for everyone to read; and integrate other
Do not develop content from one article or textbook;	media to illustrate content and engage learners.
synthesize literature and resources not available to	Give an Effective Presentation
learners.
Develop a list of topics and subtopics to be presented	Practice your presentation ahead of time to gauge time. or use outline format.	During the presentation, repeat and emphasize im-
Do not write out presentations in sentence form to	portant points.
avoid reading to the group; use bulleted, short	Speak clearly and at an appropriate speed.
   phrases.	Never tell learners you “ran out of time”; if you fin-
Next to the list of topics or outline, include sample	ish early, move to your clinical scenarios and extra questions to engage learners.	learning activities, then summarize the content.


higher-level thinking and development of clinical judg- ment because the teacher can ask open-ended questions that ask learners to think beyond the obvious, to con- sider alternative perspectives, and to examine different options (Dinkins & Cangelosi, 2019; Hensel & Bill- ings, 2020; Oermann & Gaberson, 2021). Carefully planned questions can help learners make connections between theoretical knowledge and clinical practice, critique evidence and its applicability to patient care, and clarify their own thinking. Instead of asking a series of questions one after the other, which can be stressful for learners, the APN can intersperse questions with phrases such as “Tell me more about x” or “Share how you would think through what to do with this patient.” Another strategy is for the APN to think aloud and share how they would approach a problem, modeling the process for learners.
fte cognitive taxonomy described previously in the
chapter is a valuable tool to guide the level of questions asked in a one-to-one or group discussion. fte APN can begin with remembering questions, those that assess the learners’ knowledge of facts, and can then progress

toward higher-level questions. Table 18.4 provides ex- amples of questions at different levels.
   A discussion can occur on a one-to-one basis with a learner or in a small group. Learners need to know that their views and opinions in a discussion are heard and acknowledged even if they differ from the APN’s. fte following are guidelines for conducting an effective discussion:
• Focus the discussion on the outcomes to be met.
• Encourage the participation of each learner, but do not force someone to participate.
• Actively participate as a means of guiding the discus-
sion toward the outcomes but do not dominate the discussion.
• Ask open-ended questions that cannot be answered
with a “yes-no” response.
• Sequence questions from low to high level; the taxon- omy is useful for this purpose.
• Although the first answer may be correct, encourage
additional answers and explore other possibilities; ask for a rationale.


   Table 18.4	
Levels of Questions for Discussion

LevelSample QuestionsRemembering: Questions that ask for recall of facts and specific informationWhat is this type of breath sound called? Define peak expiratory flow rate.Understanding: Questions that explore understanding of contentWhat is the difference between emphysema and chronic bronchitis? Give an example of a short-acting bronchodilator.Applying: Questions that examine the ability of learners to relate content to a new or different situationHow do your patient’s symptoms compare with what you read about chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? Why is it important to monitor these symptoms?Analyzing: Questions about analyzing data and relationshipsWhat data support your diagnosis, and why are these data relevant? What are alternative interventions that might work in this situation and why?Evaluating: Higher-level questions that explore clinical judgments, critical thinkingAre your interventions effective, and how can you determine that? Your patient is still coughing. What changes might be made in the patient’s medications, and why might these changes work better?Creating: Questions that ask for development of new ideas and plansHow would you modify this follow-up plan considering the patient’s home situation? Tell me about two new interventions that would be effective in your patient’s care, their evidence base, and how you would decide whether to use them.


• Prevent side-tracking of ideas and help learners return to the topic. For discussions in small groups, assign roles—time keeper, recorder, and presenter—to keep the discussion on track and meet objectives.
• Summarize what was learned and how it relates to
the objectives set for the discussion (Oermann et al., 20181).
Clinical Conference
Clinical conferences are specific types of discussions held with students and staff in the clinical setting. ftey can precede patient care to ensure that learners have an un- derstanding of how to care for the patient. Often the APN can use these conferences to explain patient prob- lems, interventions, and underlying rationales to learners if they lack the knowledge base to care for those partic- ular patients.
   Conferences held after the learner’s experience, in person or online at a later time, provide an opportu- nity to review patient care; to discuss patient problems, interventions, and other possible approaches; to apply concepts to clinical practice; and to explore issues in practice. Conferences also provide a forum for learners to reflect on their experiences in clinical practice. In clinical conferences, like other types of discussions, the APN should ask open-ended and probing questions that encourage learners to think about alternative ways of ad- dressing clinical problems and to pursue new evidence that might influence decisions about interventions.
Clinical Case
Clinical cases are actual or simulated scenarios for analysis. ftis method is effective for learning how to apply content to clinical practice and for gaining skill in analyzing data, identifying problems, deciding on possible solutions, and developing critical thinking and clinical judgment skills (Li et al., 2019; Oermann & Gaberson, 2021; Oermann et al., 2018; Vacek & Liesveld, 2019). fte value of cases for analysis is that they provide experience for learners in thinking through clinical decisions before they are faced with those decisions in actual practice.
   With this strategy, the APN develops both a case and open-ended and higher-level questions about it. fte cases should be short, a few sentences to a paragraph, and present only essential information. Questions can be directed toward assessment, focusing on missing data in

the case and what additional information is needed for decision making. ftey also can be geared to identifying problems in the case, interventions for immediate action and for planning care, their evidence base, alternative decisions and consequences, and how concepts can be used as a framework for understanding the case and an- swering the questions.
  fte questions focus on the outcomes to be met by analyzing the case. For example, if the outcome is to se- lect appropriate nursing interventions for a patient with delirium, the APN could ask learners about guidelines to use, early recognition, and how they would manage the patient’s care. In analyzing a case, learners should de- scribe the thought process they used and the rationale for their answers. Because the cases are short, they can be integrated easily within a lecture, used at the end of a class as small group work, used in an online course for students to apply what they are learning to a clinical sce- nario, discussed in clinical conferences, and explored on a one-to-one basis with the learner. Examples of clinical cases are provided in Box 18.4.
Case Study
A case study provides an in-depth description of a pa- tient, family, or community, including background information. Case studies can be developed based on actual or simulated clinical situations, similar to shorter cases. Questioning strategies can include asking learners to differentiate significant from nonsignificant informa- tion in the case and to examine the effect of the patient’s background on current problems and situations. A sam- ple case study is presented in Box 18.5.
Unfolding Cases
An unfolding case represents a simulated clinical situation that changes or evolves over time (Bowman, 2017; Hong & Yu, 2017; Smallheer, 2016; Zook et al., 2018). With this teaching method, the case or clinical scenario is pre- sented first, followed by questions for learners. After they analyze the scenario and answer the questions, the case unfolds with more information such as new laboratory or diagnostic findings or changes in the patient’s health status. Learners critique the new scenario and again an- swer questions about it. Smallheer (2016) described the reverse case study, which incorporates students into the development of the scenario. In this method, students



box 18.4Examples of Clinical Cases
A. Mrs. B, a 46-year-old, is brought to the clinic by	preceptor does not agree and tells you to give her husband with complaints of weakness of the	the medication to the patient.
left arm and difficulty “getting her thoughts.”	1. What are two possible approaches you fte husband tells you that his wife was treated a		could take in this situation?
few months ago for a cerebral aneurysm but has	2. What are the advantages and disadvantages been fine since then. Mrs. B’s blood pressure is		of those options?
210/90. She slowly answers your questions with	3. What would you do? Why?
long pauses in between sentences.	D. Your patient who is increasingly restless pulls
1. What information would you collect from	out her endotracheal tube.
the husband as a priority? Provide a ratio-	What should you do first? Include evidence to nale why this information is critical to de-		support this action.
ciding on the diagnosis and actions to take.
2. What are possible problems that  Mrs. B	E. You are working in the emergency department might be encountering? Describe why each		when a young man is admitted following a of these is a possibility.		motor vehicle accident. His larynx appears to
B. You are working in home health care and have a	be fractured, and there are many facial cuts new patient with edema of both legs and extreme	and bruises. You suction him only to find large fatigue. fte patient has no family in the area.	amounts of blood; you determine that the only
1. What additional data would you collect in	way to keep the airway clear is by suctioning.
your first home visit? Why is this important?	1. What are your options for managing his
2. Summarize the information you might ob-	2. airway?
tain in the home visit and identify a priority	What observations would you make,  and
problem. What resources are needed for this	what other data would you collect that patient’s care?	might affect your decision about how to
manage his airway?
C. You believe your patient may be experiencing	3. How would you manage this patient’s air- side effects from her medication, but your		way? Provide a rationale.

identify information relevant to a clinical situation and analyze content to create details of the case.
Multimedia
Media provide for multisensory learning. Depending on the type of media, different sensory modes are used. For most learners, it is easier to learn when more senses are involved in receiving the message. Learners can see a patient on YouTube or a video clip rather than imag- ining what the patient looks like; they can observe how an intervention should be implemented after hearing the verbal description by the APN or reading about it in

their textbook. Multimedia are useful for demonstrating procedures and technical skills from gathering the equip- ment through each step that follows. As learners practice their skills, they can record their performance and replay the video recording when questions arise or they are un- sure about their performance.
   Multimedia also are valuable for exploring ethical is- sues and values. For example, a short segment from a video, often called a trigger film, can be used to present clinical situations for learners to examine their values and beliefs and to consider how they would respond in those situations. Scenarios can be used to present ethical





     Example of a Case Study
Sally, a 6-year-old, has been complaining of pain in her abdomen off and on for the last week. Two weeks ago, she was seen by the pediatrician for a respiratory flu. Sally’s current symptoms are two episodes of vomiting this morning, abdominal cramps, no appetite, and a rash on her back. Vital signs, blood pressure, height, and weight are nor- mal. Sally is holding her abdomen and tells you it hurts. When you palpate her abdomen, you find diffuse tenderness without any rebound. ftere are no masses that you can detect. Sally’s past medical history is unremarkable. She has never had any serious illnesses and has never been hospitalized. Her mother tells you that there are no changes in the family or home situation; they recently re- turned from a camping trip that Sally enjoyed.
1. What laboratory tests would you expect to or- der? Explain each test and its relationship to this case.
2. What is the significance of “diffuse tenderness without any rebound?”
3. Name all possible problems Sally might have and why.
4. If Sally asks you what’s wrong, how would you respond? Provide a rationale based on her age and development.
dilemmas for individuals and groups of students and staff to analyze; small group activities accompanying the media can teach valuable lessons in analyzing and resolv- ing ethical issues.
Technologies for Teaching
fte growth of online courses and programs in nursing has led to many new technological innovations for teach- ing. As learning activities, students can develop Web sites, infographics, YouTube videos, educational videos for patient education, and many other types of products using technology. A growing number of courses inte- grate virtual simulations and interactive case studies, and

technologies using virtual reality and augmented reality are developing at a fast pace. Other technology-based strategies such as electronic concept mapping, electronic case histories, and digital storytelling can be used to facilitate clinical reasoning skills (Moreau et al., 2018; Shellenbarger & Robb, 2015). Furthermore, there are several free gaming applications that can be used as inter- active teaching strategies to engage learners. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to examine the multiple types of technology available for teaching, but the APN should keep current with the development of these technologies and their use in nursing education.
Demonstration
Demonstration is the presentation of how to perform a procedure or skill with the intent for learners to model that performance and implement the skill on their own. Before demonstrating the procedure, the APN should ex- plain its purpose, the equipment to gather, and the steps to follow. Any explanation of the rationale underlying the skill and discussion about its use in clinical practice should occur at this point in the instruction. As learners practice the skill, feedback from the APN should focus on the performance itself. Because psychomotor learning is egocentric, learners need to focus on manipulating the equipment and refining their skill, not on recalling or applying theoretical knowledge.
All learners must be able to see each step to be per-
formed and hear any explanations. By observing the demonstration, learners develop an image of what the skill looks like and how to perform it, which then guides their practice of the skill. Once competent, learners can practice skills on their own. Continued practice is criti- cal to refine performance, to become more consistent, to carry out the skill in a reasonable amount of time, and to retain the skill long term. It is through this practice that learners develop their expertise. Skills are best learned and practiced in a skills laboratory or simulation prior to having to use them in patient care.
Simulations
With simulations, learners have an opportunity to de- velop their decision-making and clinical judgment skills, to learn to communicate with others and work as a team, and to practice psychomotor and technical skills in a safe environment. With high-fidelity simulation, they can



analyze scenarios, conduct assessments, make decisions and view the outcomes of those decisions, and develop their ability to think critically and act quickly before car- ing for a real patient. Simulation can be used for learning in all of the domains.
  fte use of simulation in nursing has expanded rapidly. Many evidence reviews have documented the outcomes of simulation and its value in develop- ing essential competencies for practice among nursing students, nurses, and interprofessional students and teams. Studies document the benefits of simulation for promoting teamwork, communication skills, clinical judgment, decision making, empathy, and other out- comes (Aebersold, 2018; Ding et al., 2020; Foronda et al., 2020; Gelis et al., 2020; Labrague et al., 2019; Lapierre et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020b). A systematic review by Lewis and colleagues (2019) found that high- fidelity simulation with acute care nurses improved pa- tient safety for high-risk, low-frequency events. Some of the growth of simulation in nursing education also relates to the lack of clinical sites available for student experiences and the realization that simulation can serve as a replacement for traditional clinical experiences. Simulation exposes learners to clinical situations and technologies not available to all students in the clini- cal setting. Although simulation will not completely replace care of patients in health-care settings, its effec- tiveness in promoting a range of competencies has made it an important teaching method.
ftere are varied types of simulations, and the APN
should consider these carefully when planning the in- struction. Simulations differ based on fidelity, or the real- ism of the simulation. High-fidelity simulation involves the use of lifelike manikins that create a realistic patient situation. ftese manikins have the technology to mimic human anatomy and physiology, and learners are able to respond to physiological changes in real time. With high-fidelity simulations, learners can assess a patient and clinical situation, analyze data, identify priorities, inter- vene individually and as a team, and evaluate outcomes. Moderate-fidelity simulators are typically life-sized man- ikins that only mimic some physiological changes (e.g., the learner may hear heart and lung sounds but without chest movement of the manikin). Low-fidelity simula- tors are task trainers for practicing skills, such as a gel pad for practicing intramuscular injections. fte type of

simulation to use depends on the outcomes to be met. If the goal is to develop or practice an individual skill, a task trainer would be sufficient. However, if the outcome is to learn to work as an interprofessional team, a high- fidelity simulation would be more appropriate.
   Standardized patients represent another type of sim- ulation that can be used for teaching students and staff. Standardized patients are individuals who are trained to portray a patient with a diagnosis or health problem for learners to collect a health history, practice a physical ex- amination, interact with the patient, and develop other skills. Standardized patients are effective for assessment of learner competencies because the actors re-create the same patient situation with all students (Oermann & Gaberson, 2021).
   With simulations, learners should have an opportu- nity to reflect on their experiences and decisions; this occurs in the debriefing session after the simulation. During debriefing, the teacher guides learners to reflect on and discuss what went well, where improvements are needed, and what they might do differently next time. ftis is where much of the learning occurs. fte extent of learning during debriefing depends on the skills of the person who is facilitating the debrief. Pal- aganas and colleagues (2016) recommended the use of a structure to guide the debriefing, especially for nov- ice educators. One such structure begins with learners reflecting on the simulation experience, then proceeds to a phase in which they identify gaps in performance and where further learning is needed, and ends with a summary of strategies for continuing practice of newly developed skills.
In a systematic review of 18 studies on debriefing
methods, Lee and colleagues (2020a) found seven types of debriefing methods that were used in nursing education: video debriefing, debriefing for meaning- ful learning (DML), peer-led video debriefing, senior debriefing, good judgment tool debriefing, verbal de- briefing combined with journaling or blogging, and instructor-led usual discussion debriefing. None of these methods for debriefing was found to be superior compared to the others: learning outcomes improved with all of these methods. Structured debriefing meth- ods, however, such as video debriefing and DML, were more effective for learning than verbal discussion alone.



Evaluation of Learning
Evaluation is an integral part of any teaching situation and serves different roles. In working with patients, stu- dents, and staff, individually and in small groups, the APN continually assesses how well learners are acquir- ing an understanding of the content and developing the ability to perform skills. Using this information, the APN modifies the teaching, perhaps explaining the content again and in a different way, adding multime- dia, suggesting other learning activities, and allowing the individual more practice time for skills. ftis type of evaluation is diagnostic; it represents feedback to the learner about progress in meeting the outcomes and pro- vides the basis for developing a plan for improvement (Oermann & Gaberson, 2021). ftis is referred to as for- mative evaluation.
A second type of evaluation is summative. As the
name suggests, this type of evaluation summarizes what has been learned rather than providing feedback to learn- ers. Examples of summative evaluation are final exam- inations in a course and annual performance evaluations. With both formative and summative evaluation, the outcomes to be met or competencies to be developed serve as the framework for evaluation. fte evaluation

on a continuous basis to obtain their perceptions and for timely feedback to learners.
• Rating scale: Course-related clinical evaluation tools
for nursing students and performance-evaluation tools consist of a list of competencies to be demon- strated and a scale for rating if or how well learners are able to perform them. fte scale for rating perfor- mance is often pass-fail or satisfactory-unsatisfactory, but it also might include more than two levels. With a scale that has multiple levels, for example, from 1 to 4, there are typically descriptions of each level included with the tool. When using rating scales, it is critical for the APN to understand the meaning of each com- petency in the tool and the performance expected of the learner (Oermann & Gaberson, 2021).
• Checklist: Steps in a procedure or skill are checked off
as the learner performs them.
• Test: fte learner is asked to answer a set of written questions about the content.
• Written assignment: Students complete papers of vary-
ing length.

ROLE OF ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSE AS EDUCATOR

determines the progress of learners in meeting these out-	 	

comes and developing clinical competencies or, for sum- mative evaluation, if they have achieved them.
   ftere are many methods for evaluating learning. fte APN selects methods that provide information on the outcomes to be assessed and are appropriate for the learner. Evaluation methods include the following:
• Questioning: Questions are asked to assess the extent of learning. ftese are discussed earlier in the chapter.
• Observation of performance: Learners are observed
while performing procedures, providing care, and carrying out interventions in clinical practice. Ob- servations of the learner should be made over time and in different clinical situations. A one-time obser- vation may not be indicative of the learner’s overall competence. Often a summary of the observations is recorded in a narrative note or on a checklist of per- formance. It is important for the APN to share obser- vations and impressions of performance with learners

Providing education to patients, students, and staff is an integral part of the APN role. fte APN teaches pa- tients about their illness and preventing further compli- cations, the treatments and medications and how to use them, how to provide self-care, and the importance of follow-up care. In many settings, it is up to the APN to prepare the patient for managing their own care at home. Teaching about illness and self-care is only one of the areas of education provided by the APN. fte APN also teaches patients and families about preventing illness and staying healthy. Without education by the APN, few patients would be informed about their health and how to maintain it. APNs are well suited to provide health- related patient education because they understand inter- ventions for both health and illness. To provide effective education, it is important for APNs to consider health literacy and to address SDOH. Educational sessions
should be individualized to the patient and family.



   APNs also may be involved in teaching graduate and un- dergraduate nursing students. ftey may serve as a preceptor for students or as a clinical instructor for a nursing pro- gram. Because of their extensive clinical knowledge and skills, APNs may participate in classroom teaching and give lectures and speeches in their area of expertise and serve as faculty members in schools of nursing.
   Another component of the APN role is to educate nursing staff and other health-care providers. ftis edu- cation may be informal, teaching in the clinical setting as the need arises, or through formal continuing education programs. As APNs become known for their particular areas of expertise, they are often asked to organize and present continuing education programs and provide in-service education for staff.

SUMMARY


fte APN has an important role in educating patients, students, nurses, and other learners. fte teaching process described in this chapter—assessing learner needs, plan- ning the education, selecting teaching methods, and eval- uating learning—provides a framework for teaching any of these groups of learners. Nurses in advanced practice are well prepared for their role as educator with their ex- tensive knowledge base, expert clinical skills, and strong communication skills. fte knowledge and expertise of the APN combined with an understanding of the educa- tional process prepare the APN to meet the learning needs of patients, families, students, nurses, and others regard- less of the setting in which the nurse chooses to practice.















Culture as a Variable in Practice
Mary Masterson Germain




Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Discuss the relationships among race, ethnicity, poverty, and health disparities.
• Evaluate your level of cultural and linguistic proficiency in caring for culturally diverse patient populations.
• Identify areas of knowledge and skill that would make you a more culturally
proficient caregiver.
• Analyze the extent to which your current practice meets the legal and regulatory requirements established for the delivery of culturally competent care.
• Identify resources that you and your professional colleagues can utilize to promote
culturally proficient care in your practice setting.
• Integrate the new knowledge that you gain from this chapter into your practice.




INTRODUCTION

ftis chapter is an invitation to step into other worlds— worlds inhabited by people whose experiences are quite different from your own. You will be asked to reflect on the beliefs and values that make you who you are and to examine how they affect you as a healer and caregiver. As an advanced practice nurse (APN), you play a pivotal role in shaping the quality of care that patients receive,
324

both directly and indirectly. You are privileged to share in some of your patients’ most profound and intimate experiences. Your challenge is to provide comprehensive, culturally competent care to populations and in practice settings that are increasingly diverse.
   To fully enter into the patient’s experience and to pro- vide comprehensive care that is respectful of the patient’s cultural beliefs and practices, nurses need to find ways to bridge the linguistic and cultural challenges that are



inherent in caring for increasingly diverse populations. It is uncomfortable to stretch our ethnocentric boundaries; it is much easier to care for replicas of ourselves. How- ever, if you are open to learning from your patients, the transient discomfort that you experience from having your time-honored interventions and teaching strategies tested and found wanting by patients with different cul- tural perspectives will be rewarded by gaining rich in- sights into cultural beliefs and practices that will inform your practice for years to come. Let us begin the journey.


SCOPE OF THE NEED

Every 10 years, the U.S. Department of Health and Hu- man Services (USDHHS), Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (ODPHP) produces a compre- hensive assessment of the health of Americans and sets goals and objectives for improving their health and well-being over the next decade (Healthy People 2010 and Healthy People 2020). Healthy People 2010, published in 2000, established two overarching goals for improving the health of U.S. residents and communities in the first decade of the 21st century: (1) increase quality and years of healthy life and (2) eliminate health disparities.
   ftese two goals, representing 28 focus areas and 467 measurable objectives, had a single, overarching purpose of promoting health and preventing illness, disability, and premature death and a unifying vision: healthy peo- ple living in healthy communities (USDHHS, 2000). Note that goal 2 does not say reduce health disparities; it says eliminate—a lofty goal. In December 2010, the USDHHS released the next decennial document, Healthy People 2020. It identified the following four critical goals encompassing 42 topic areas and identified approximately 1,200 objectives to be tracked over the next decade:
• Attain high-quality, longer lives free of preventable disease, disability, injury, and premature death.
• Achieve health equity, eliminate disparities, and im-
prove the health of all groups.
• Create social and physical environments that promote good health for all.
• Promote quality of life, healthy development, and
healthy behaviors across all life stages. (USDHHS, ODPHP, 2010a)
  
Healthy People 2030 represents the fifth edition of Healthy People. It’s five overarching goals, approved by the USDHHS in June 2018, are:
• Attain healthy, thriving lives and well-being, free of preventable disease, disability, injury, and premature death.
• Eliminate health disparities, achieve health equity,
and attain health literacy to improve the health and well-being of all.
• Create social, physical, and economic environments
that promote attaining full potential for health and well-being for all.
• Promote healthy development, healthy behaviors, and
well-being across all life stages.
• Engage leadership, key constituents, and the pub- lic across multiple sectors to take action and design policies that improve the health and well-being of all (USDHHS, ODPHP, 2020).
   As with Healthy People 2010, the goals are uncompro- mising; disparities in access and quality of health care are to be eliminated, and equity becomes a key goal. It is also critical to note that ethnicity and the social determinants of health (SDOH) are inextricably linked in the discus- sion of the disparities, health status, and access and use of health-care services presented in both Healthy People 2010 and Healthy People 2020 and in the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) 2016 Quality Strategy (CMS, 2016).
   ftis chapter approaches cultural competence in ad- vanced practice nursing from a similar frame of reference and begins by examining key characteristics of the Amer- ican population and how much progress has been made in achieving the goals of Healthy People 2020.

WHO ARE WE CARING FOR?


• fte number of people living in the United States as of December 1, 2020, was estimated to be 330,656,950 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2020a).
• 44.4 million immigrants lived in the United States
in 2017, comprising 13.6% of the population. In 1960, only 9.7 million immigrants lived in the United States, comprising 5.4% of the population (Radford & Noe-Bustamante, 2019).



• Immigration to the United States represents 29% of the growth in the U.S. population since 2000 (Pew Research Center, 2015, p. 65).
• fte projected growth in the U.S. population varies
depending on the rate of net international migration. fte U.S. population by 2050 is projected to be be- tween 458 million, given a high level of net interna- tional migration, and 423 million, given a low level of net international migration (Ortman & Guarneri, 2018, p. 2).
• fte majority of the current immigrant population
comes from Latin America, South Asia, or East Asia, in contrast to immigrants in the 1960s and 1970s who came mostly from Europe (Pew Research Center, 2015).
• By 2045, the United States is projected to become
“minority White” with the following ethno-racial mix: Whites 49.7%; Hispanics 24.6%; Blacks 13.1%,
Asians 7.9%, and multiracial 3.8% (Frey, 2018).
• Approximately 45% of the 44.4 million immigrants in the United States live in just three states: California (24%: 10.6 million), Texas (11%: 2.4 million), and New York (10%: 1.5 million). Texas and New York had over 4.5 million immigrants apiece. fte major- ity of immigrants lived in 20 metropolitan areas with New York, Los Angeles, and Miami having the largest immigrant populations (Radford, 2019b).
• fte top five states with children under 18 living with
their immigrant parents in 2016 were California (4.3 million), Texas (2.4 million), New York (1.5 million), Florida (1.3 million), and New Jersey (747,000). ftese five states accounted for 57% of the children of immigrant parents who lived in the United States (Zong et al., 2018).
   In addition, the following population change is ex- pected in the coming years:
• As the Baby Boomer generation ages, older people will outnumber children for the first time in U.S. his- tory. By 2034, 77 million people are projected to be 65 years of age or older, compared to 76.7 million 18 and under (U.S. Census Bureau, 2019).
   Because the demographic data presented here repre- sent nationwide statistics, they do not capture the com- plexity of delivering culturally competent care, especially

in urban settings that traditionally have large immigrant populations. Racial origin is associated with significant differences in health status and disease, condition- specific morbidity and mortality, and socioeconomic status. In order to effectively measure and address dispar- ities in access to and quality of care in the United States, several critical federal initiatives have been implemented. In 1997, President Clinton appointed a Presidential Advisory Commission on Consumer Protection and Quality in the Health Care Industry. On March 12, 1998, the commission completed its final report to the president, “Quality First: Better Health Care for All Americans” (Agency for Healthcare Research and Qual- ity [AHRQ], 1998). fte report called for the president to take a leadership role in developing a broad national consensus on the need to improve the quality of health care. fte commission recommended six national goals and the development of measurable objectives for each goal. It also recommended the development of core sets of quality measures that should be standardized and uti- lized across the entire health-care industry. fte national goals and objectives were to be revised as improvement
was documented and new areas of need arose.
  fte AHRQ has played a pivotal role in implement- ing the recommendations of the commission. Since 2003, the AHRQ, on behalf of the secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS), has led an Interagency Work Group, with guidance from the AHRQ National Advisory Council and the Institute of Medicine (IOM), that has produced two annual comprehensive reports: the National Healthcare Quality Report (NHQR) and the National Healthcare Disparities Report (NHDR). After generating the fifth set of reports in 2007, the AHRQ asked the former IOM, now the National Acad- emy of Medicine, for recommendations as to how the reports could be improved. fte IOM formed a consen- sus committee to study the reports, headed by Sheila Burke, MPA, RN, former chief of staff to Senator Robert Dole and currently a Faculty Research Fellow at the Malcolm Weiner Center for Social Policy and an adjunct lecturer in public policy at the John F. Ken- nedy School of Government, Harvard University. fte committee’s report, titled Future Directions for the Na- tional Healthcare Quality and Disparities Reports, was released by the IOM on April 14, 2010. fte report acknowledged the need to continuously assess quality


and equity in health care on an ongoing basis and com- mended the AHRQ for developing the annual set of reports. fte committee also made recommendations as to how the reports could be made more effective in pro- moting the reduction of disparities and improving the quality of health care. fte IOM’s authoring committee recommended:
• Align the content of the reports with nationally recog- nized priority areas for quality improvement to help drive national action.
• Select measures that reflect health-care attributes or
processes that are deemed to have the greatest impact on population health.
• Affirm through the contents of the reports that achiev-
ing equity is an essential part of quality improvement.
• Increase the reach and usefulness of the AHRQ’s fam- ily of report-related products.
• Revamp the presentation of the reports to tell a more
complete quality-improvement story.
• Analyze and present data in ways that inform policy

and promote best-in-class achievement for all actors.
• Identify measure- and data-needs to set a research and data collection agenda (IOM, 2010).
fte Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Pub.
L. No. 111-48) (ACA), passed by the 111th Congress and signed into law by President Barack Obama on March 23, 2010, mandated the development of a Na- tional Quality Strategy (NQS). With input from more than 300 organizations, individuals, representatives of the health-care industry, the public, and other stake- holders, the NQS established three comprehensive goals (better care, healthy people/healthy communities, and affordable care), coupled with six priorities representing the major health issues confronting Americans. fte six priorities were aligned with nine levers (e.g., payment, health information technology, innovation, and dif- fusion) that would help health-care businesses and or- ganizations to maximize their potential to address the priorities. See Box 19.1 for the list of priorities.
In 2014, acting on the recommendations in Future
Directions for the National Healthcare Quality and Dis- parities Reports, as well as input from end-product us- ers and other federal agencies conducting health-related research, the AHRQ made a major change in the doc- uments. fte previously separate NHQR and NHDR

were combined into a single document, entitled the Na- tional Healthcare Quality and Disparities Report (QDR). In addition, instead of presenting extensive data for each of the priority populations and measurement parame- ters in the integrated report, individual Chartbooks were created for key areas requiring individual analysis (e.g., priority populations such as Hispanic and Black populations, women’s health, rural health, and so on). fte Chartbooks for each year become available on a roll- ing basis as data analysis is completed. fte QDR(s) and Chartbooks may be accessed at https://www.ahrq.gov
/research/findings/nhqrdr/index.html. In 2015, data synthesis took another big step forward as the annual NQS Update was integrated into the 2015 National Healthcare QDR. For the first time, information on the status of health-care quality, access, and disparities was available in a single document (AHRQ, 2019b, p. v. https://www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/nhqrdr/nhqdr 15/index.html).
  fte 2018 National Healthcare QDR makes it clear that 18 years after the publication of Healthy People 2010, disparities persist. “Overall, some disparities were getting smaller from 2000 through 2016–2017, but dis- parities persist between racial groups and especially for poor and uninsured populations in all priority areas”



(AHRQ, 2019c, p. 1). ftree examples of disparities are the following:
• In 2016, the measure with the largest income dispar- ities was people without a usual source of care who indicated a financial or insurance reason for not hav- ing a source of care. fte percentages were 22.9% for poor people, 19.9% for low-income people, 13.4% for middle-income people, and 6.8% for high-income people (Figure 102) (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 112).
• In 2015, the percentage of women ages 21 to 65 years
who received a Pap test in the last 3 years was lower for low-income women (74.5%) and middle-income women (79.3%) compared with high-income women (88%; Figure 103) (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 113).
• Diabetes ranked seventh as a leading cause of death in
2017 for the non-Hispanic White population (2.5% of deaths) but fourth for the non-Hispanic Asian population (5.8%), and fifth for the Hispanic (4.7%), non-Hispanic Black (4.4%), and non-Hispanic Asian Pacific Islanders (API) (4.2%) populations (Heron, 2019, p. 13).
Racial and ethnic disparities also varied by state:
• Some Western and Midwestern states (Idaho, Mon- tana, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oregon, South Dakota, and Utah), several Southern states (Kentucky, Maryland, and West Virginia), and Maine and New Hampshire had the fewest racial and ethnic disparities overall (AHRQ, 2019b, p. 15).
• Several Northeastern states (Connecticut, Massa-
chusetts, New Jersey, New York, and Pennsylvania), several Midwestern states (Illinois, Minnesota, Ohio, and Wisconsin), and California, South Carolina, and Texas had the most racial and ethnic disparities overall (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 15).
• Some states in the Northeast (Delaware, Maine,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Rhode Island), some in the Midwest (Min- nesota, North Dakota, and Wisconsin), and Colorado and West Virginia had the highest overall quality scores. Scores were based on the number of measures that were better, same, or worse than the national av- erage for each measure (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 13).
• Some Southern and Southwestern states (District of
Columbia, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and

Texas), several Western states (Arizona, California, and Nevada), some Northwestern states (Montana, Oregon, and Wyoming), and New York and Alaska had the lowest overall quality scores (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 14).
   fte annual National Healthcare QDRs produced by the AHRQ utilize two critical definitions:
Access to health care is defined as “the timely use of per- sonal health services to achieve the best health out- comes” (AHRQ, 2016a, p. 3).
Person-centered care is defined as “ensuring that each person and family is engaged as partners in their care” (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 35). fte report goes on to stress the important relationship between patient-centered care and quality, citing the IOM’s definition of pa- tient centeredness: “Health care that establishes a partnership among practitioners, patients, and their families (when appropriate) to ensure that decisions respect patients' wants, needs, and preferences and that patients have the education and support they need to make decisions and participate in their own care” (IOM, 2001b, Ch. 2, p. 3).
  fte 2018 National Healthcare QDR identifies four major factors that impact access to and quality of care: health insurance, having a usual source of care, timeliness (the ability to access care when needed), and communi- cation (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 17). Some examples of the disparities identified in the report are listed in Box 19.2. fte report also identifies four major barriers to effective patient-provider communication and patient-centered care:
• Language barriers
• Racial and ethnic concordance between the patient and provider
• Effects of disabilities on patients’ health-care
experiences
• Providers’ cultural competency (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 36)
   fte findings in the 2018 National Healthcare QDR in- dicate that progress is being made in facilitating equitable access to essential health-care services. Twenty-one access measures were assessed for. Of these, only 3 were wors- ening and 11 were improving; 7 remained unchanged



Box 19.2Some Health-Care Disparities Identified in the National Healthcare Quality and Disparities Report• Compared with other racial and ethnic groups,	in all locations compared with Blacks (AHRQ, Asians were the most likely to have private health	2017a, p. 15).
insurance, whereas Hispanics/Latinos (of any race)	• In 2018, among adults ages 18 to 64, 9% of
were least likely (49%) (AHRQ, 2020, p. 20).	Whites, 15.2% of Blacks, 8.1% of Asians, and
• Conversely, Asians were the least likely to have	26.7% of Hispanics lacked health insurance cov- public coverage, whereas Blacks were the most	erage at the time of interview (Figure 21) (AHRQ, likely   (43.8%),   followed   closely by  Native	2019d, p. 24).
Americans and Alaska Natives (43.2%) (AHRQ,	• Hispanics experienced worse access to care com-
2020, p. 20).	pared with non-Hispanic Whites for 75% of the
• Asians received worse care than Whites for 27%	measures for the most recent data year (AHRQ, of quality measures but better care than Whites	2019d, p. 30).
for 28% of quality measures. Disparities were im-	• Hispanics received worse care than Whites for
proving for only 2 measures for Asians (AHRQ,	about 35% of quality measures. From 2000 to 2019d, p. 1).	2017, disparities improved for 5 measures for His-
• fte measures with the largest  disparities for	panics (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 1).
Asians include (1) adults with LEP and (2) a usual • In 2016, 8.3% of Black children who had any source of care (USC) who had language assistance	appointments for routine health care in the last (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 80).	12 months sometimes or never got an appoint-
• Poor people—those at or below 100% of the	ment for routine care as soon as needed compared Federal Poverty Level (FPL)—experienced worse	with 4.9% of White children (Figure 25) (AHRQ, access to care compared with high-income peo-	2019d, p. 27).
ple (400% or more of FPL) for 19 of 20 access • In 2016, non-Hispanic Blacks reported 220.8 chil- measures. Across the QDR measure set for the	dren (ages 2–17) per 100,000 population were ad- most recent data year, health insurance measures	mitted to the hospital for asthma compared with showed the largest disparities between poor peo-	45.9 per 100,000 cases for non-Hispanic Whites ple and high-income people (AHRQ, 2019b,	(Figure 62) (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 74).
p. 25).	• In 2016, the rate of in-hospital deaths per 100,000
• Blacks, Native Americans and Alaska Natives, and	deliveries was 3.5 among Whites, 10.1 among Native Hawaiians/Pacific Islanders  (NHPIs) re-	Blacks, 7.5 among APIs, and 7.8 among Hispanics ceived worse care than Whites for about 40% of	(Figure 164) (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 184).
quality measures (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 1).	• Persistent racial and ethnic disparities in maternal
• In 2014, the percentage of people who identified	mortality have also accompanied the rise in mater- a hospital, emergency department, or clinic as a	nal deaths with Black women having a pregnancy- source of ongoing care was higher for Blacks and	related mortality ratio three times as high as that Hispanics in all residence locations compared with	of non-Hispanic White women (AHRQ, 2019d, Whites. Hispanics also had worse percentages	p. 181; Petersen et al., 2019).


(AHRQ, 2019d, p. 17). Of the three that were wors- ening, one is of particular concern because childhood health often drives one’s adult health status: “Children who had a doctor’s office or clinic visit in the last 12 months and needed care, tests, or treatment who some- times or never found it easy to get the care, tests, or treat- ment” (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 18).
   Clearly racial origin alone does not account for these disparities in health and health outcomes. Health status is influenced by a multiplicity of factors, as reflected in Figure 19.1. Key determinants associated with poor health status and outcomes also tend to reflect such factors as eco- nomic status and household composition (DeNavas-Walt et al., 2011) as well as English-language proficiency and insurance status. fte following statements further illus- trate disparities in health and health outcomes:
• In 2017, 20.8% of poor individuals under age 65 had private health insurance compared with 91% of high-income individuals (Figure 24) (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 26).
• In 2008, 7.5% of adults with private insurance and
29.7 % of uninsured adults sometimes or never found it easy to get care, tests, or treatment. In 2016, 7.4% of adults with private insurance and 20.2% of uninsured

adults sometimes or never found it easy to get care, tests, or treatment (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 20).
• In 2013, 17.3% of people under age 65 had health
insurance premiums and out-of-pocket medical ex- penses that were more than 10% of total family in- come. From 2006 to 2013, there were no statistically significant changes in the overall percentage. In all years, the percentage was about three times as high for poor individuals and low-income individuals and more than twice as high for middle-income individu- als compared with high-income individuals (AHRQ, 2016b, p. 5).
• In 2018, among adults ages 18 to 64, 27.4% of those
who were poor, 25.1% of those who were near poor, and 8.3% of those who were not poor lacked health insurance coverage at the time of interview (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 23).
• Per person personal health-care spending for persons
aged 65 and older was $19,098 in 2014, over five times higher than spending per child ($3,749) and al- most three times the spending per working-age person ($7,153) (CMS, 2020b).
• Persons aged 65 and older were the smallest pop-
ulation group, nearly 15% of the population, but accounted for approximately 34% of all health-care spending in 2014 (CMS, 2020b).

• People in poor households received worse care than
people in high-income households for just over 40% of patient safety measures (AHRQ, 2019d, p. 11).
   In 2018, there were 38.1 million people in the United States living in poverty, for an official poverty rate of 11.8%. ftis rate represents the fourth annual decline;
1.4 million fewer people were living in poverty in 2018 than in 2017 (Semega et al., 2020, p. 1). Poverty rates in 2018 by age and race are listed in Boxes 19.3 and 19.4.







Figure 19.1 Healthy People 2020 Approach to Social Deter- minants of Health. (Retrieved from https://www.healthypeople
.gov/2020 /topics-objectives/topic/social-determinants-of-health)





Poverty Rates in 2018 by Racial Grouping• Non-Hispanic Whites: 8.1%, 15.7 million
• Blacks: 20.8%, 8.9 million
• Asians: 10.1%, 2 million
• Hispanics: 17.6%, 10.5 million
(Semega et al., 2020, p. 15)
Health Insurance for All?
A major goal set by Healthy People 2010 was that 100% of Americans would have health insurance by 2020, and a major provision of the ACA was federal support for ex- pansion of states’ Medicaid programs and their eligibil- ity requirements. fte year before full implementation of the ACA went into effect, more than 44 million Ameri- cans had no health-care insurance coverage (Garfield & Orgera, 2019, p. 7). By January 2019, 37 states, including the District of Columbia, had adopted Medicaid expan- sion, expanding health-care coverage to over 12 million people (Garfield & Orgera, 2019, p. 3). Under the provisions of the ACA, beginning January 1, 2014, the majority of nonelderly adults with incomes at or below 138% of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL) became eligible for Medicaid in the states that expanded their Medicaid programs. fte law provided for full federal funding of the Medicaid expansion in participating states in 2016 with funding decreasing to 90% of the expansion costs in 2020. In 2018, the FPL was set at $16,753 for an indi- vidual (Garfield & Orgera, 2019, pp. 2 and 3). fte fol- lowing changes have occurred because of the ACA:
• With full implementation of the provisions of the ACA in 2014, the number and rate of uninsured per- sons in the United States dropped dramatically from 44.4 million (16.8%) in 2013 to 26.7 million (10.1%) in 2016. Almost 20 million people gained access to health insurance (Garfield & Orgera, 2019, p. 7).
• Racial disparities in insurance coverage diminished
from October 2013 to the beginning of 2016. Ap- proximately 3 million Black, non-Hispanic adults ac- quired coverage, dropping the uninsured rate by more than 50% from 22.4% to 10.6%. In addition, about
4  million  nonelderly  Hispanic  adults  acquired

coverage, reducing the uninsured rate from 41.8% to 30.5%, a 27% decline (Uberoi et al., 2016, p. 2).
• ftrough the ACA’s provisions, 6.1 million young
adults gained insurance coverage: 2.3 million of those ages 19 to 25 were allowed to remain covered under their parents’ health insurance plans until age 26 and another 3.8 million joined from the start of open en- rollment in the health insurance marketplaces in Oc- tober 2013 through the beginning of 2016 (Uberoi et al., 2016, p. 2).
   In contrast to these encouraging numbers, economi- cally challenged persons in non-Medicaid expansion states have a significant barrier to accessing timely, high-quality health care. It is estimated that some 1.9 million (2014 data) uninsured persons with mental health or substance abuse disorders resided in the 20 states that opted out of expanding their Medicaid programs and had incomes that would have made them eligible for care under an expanded Medicaid program. ftese 1.9 million persons represented 28% of the low-income, uninsured popula- tions in these 20 states (Dey et al., 2016, p. 1).
   In 2017 and 2018, Congress and the Trump admin- istration stopped short of repealing the ACA, but they succeeded in implementing coverage changes to it. ftese changes include ceasing federal reimbursement to insur- ers for cost-sharing reductions; allowing the prolifera- tion of less closely regulated plans that are not usually available to persons with preexisting conditions; new guidance from the CMS involving Medicaid waivers, in- cluding new provisions that limit eligibility such as work requirements (Garfield & Orgera, 2019, pp. 5 and 6). In 2018, for example, more than 18,000 persons in Arkan- sas lost their Medicaid coverage for failing to meet or to accurately report the state’s work requirement. ftere is also growing data to suggest that recent, more aggressive enforcement of immigration policies has produced fear in immigrant communities and contributed to decreased enrollment in both Medicaid and Children’s Health In- surance Program (CHIP) among people who are eligible for these programs (Garfield & Orgera, 2019, p. 6).

ETHICAL MANDATE


APNs frequently face a dual challenge: to provide high-quality, evidence-based care to culturally diverse



populations and to do so in communities that are often socially and economically disadvantaged. Our profes- sion’s response to this challenge is found in the American Nurses Association’s (ANA’s) Code of Ethics for Nurses with Interpretive Statements, particularly Provisions 1 and 8 (ANA, 2015a, pp. 1 and 31):
Provision 1: fte nurse practices with compassion and respect for the inherent dignity, worth, and unique attributes of each person.
Provision 8: fte nurse collaborates with other health professionals and the public to protect human rights, promote health diplomacy, and reduce health disparities.
   Central to the concept of ethical practice is the prin- ciple of justice: fair and equitable access to high-quality health-care services. ftat this access is not available for many Americans is indisputable and has served as the focal point for the debate over whether health care is a right or a privilege. fte late Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., addressed the inherent injustice in disparities in health care by saying, “Of all the forms of inequality, injustice in health care is the most shocking and inhumane” (Lee, 2016). fte racial, ethnic, and social factors creating existing disparities in health and access to health-care services create a moral imperative for APNs to integrate cultural competence into all their direct and indirect care roles. Cultural competence demands not only in- corporation of the patient’s cultural beliefs and practices into our caregiving but also broader application of the principles of cultural competence in the management of clinical services, resource allocation, and professional activities such as the formulation of health policy. It is inadequate for APNs to simply “do no harm.” APNs represent the majority of our profession’s most highly educated nurses. It is our responsibility to do more than just render high-quality care on a one-to-one basis with our patients. We are also accountable for continually im- proving the systems within which that care occurs.

WALK A MILE IN SOMEONE ELSE’S SHOES

Imagine that you are an older U.S. tourist partici- pating in an elder hostel tour abroad. ftis is the first time you have ever been out of the United States. You

have a history of hypertension and coronary artery disease as well as myopia and moderate, bilateral hear- ing loss. While abroad, you experience recurrent chest pain. fte tour guide tries unsuccessfully to locate an English-speaking physician, so you are brought to the local hospital where you are admitted for observation. After your glasses and clothing are removed, you are placed on bedrest and receive nitroglycerin intrave- nously and oxygen by nasal cannula. You are unable to reach the bedside table, and you cannot see the other patients or the staff in the ward clearly. You are unable to speak or understand the language, so you have no idea of the severity of your condition or its treatment. fte tour guide, who initially served as your interpreter, has had to return to the group that is departing for the next tour destination in the morning.
How would you feel? Vulnerable? Frightened? At the
mercy of a health-care system and care providers whose language, and perhaps beliefs and practices, are totally unfamiliar to you? Now imagine that you and your fam- ily recently immigrated to the United States. You may or may not speak and read English. fte health-care be- liefs and practices of your culture may differ significantly from those of Western medicine. You may be an undoc- umented immigrant, fearful of detection and reticent to seek care. Superimposed on your ethnic and racial status may be the social implications of coming from a culture of poverty.
   In short, you would be a prototype for many of the patients cared for by APNs. How would you want to be
treated if the roles were reversed and you were the patient?

THEORETICAL BASIS FOR CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN ADVANCED NURSING PRACTICE


Madeleine Leininger’s (2001) pioneering work in trans- cultural nursing and the development of her Culture Care fteory provides a framework for the practice of APNs who care for culturally diverse populations. Care and caring, distinguishing characteristics of professional practice to which APNs lay particular claim, are cen- tral to her theory: “Care is the essence of nursing and the central, dominant and unifying focus of nursing” (p. 35). Leininger holds that for too long caring has been



the “covert, unknown, and almost invisible aspect of nursing and health services” (p. 32).
   Leininger’s commitment to the development of a theoretical framework that would assist nurses and other health-care providers to deliver culturally congru- ent care to patients from diverse populations evolved from a commitment to improve the health of clients, families, and cultural groups; to better help patients from diverse cultural groups to maintain or regain their health; or to experience death in a manner compatible with their cultural beliefs and practices. Leininger’s the- ory acknowledges both universal and culture-specific care patterns. For instance, although beliefs and ex- pressions associated with caring may vary widely from one cultural group to another, human care practices have been documented from the beginning of recorded history.
Formulated from an anthropological perspective,
the theory questions nursing’s traditional reliance on the concepts of person, health, and the environment. Leininger (2001) notes that, in many non-Western cul- tures, family and social institutions are primary and that the language may not even have a word for person. She also notes that although nurses and nursing exert signif- icant influence over individual and societal health and the environment, these concepts are hardly unique to our profession or its practice. In place of these generic concepts, Leininger proposes that care and caring are the central core of nursing, stating, “Care is the nurse’s way of being with and helping people” (p. 40).
Leininger’s theory and the Sunrise Model shown in
Figure 19.2, which depicts both the universality and diversity of cultural care, provide a framework for the APN to examine the dynamic interplay of the many forces that influence the delivery of care. fte Culture Care fteory incorporates three major approaches to the delivery of culturally congruent nursing assessment, decision making, and interventions. Leininger defines these modalities as the following:

1. Cultural care preservation and maintenance: “Profes- sional actions and decisions that help people of a particular culture to retain and/or preserve relevant care values so that they can maintain their well be- ing, recover from illness, or face handicaps and/or death” (p. 48).
2. 
Cultural care accommodation and negotiation: “Cre- ative professional actions and decisions that help people of a designated culture to adapt to, or to negotiate with others for a beneficial or satisfying health outcome with professional care providers” (p. 48).
3. Cultural care repatterning or restructuring: “Profes- sional actions and decisions that help a client(s) re- order, change, or greatly modify their lifeways for new, different, and beneficial healthcare patterns while respecting the client(s) cultural values and beliefs and still providing a beneficial or healthier lifeway than before the changes were co-established with the client(s)” (p. 49).
   Inherent in each of these modalities are three of the core values that underlie all advanced practice nursing: respect, advocacy, and partnership. fte culturally com- petent APN is knowledgeable and respectful of diverse cultural beliefs and practices, partners with the patient to develop a care regimen that produces the desired health outcomes within the context of the patient’s cultural values, and advocates for the development of culturally appropriate patient care services.
   APNs who apply these modalities in their care of patients provide what Leininger (2001) terms culturally congruent (nursing) care. Leininger (2001, p. 49) states that this term “refers to those cognitively based assistive, supportive, facilitative, or enabling acts or decisions that are tailor made to fit with individual, group or institu- tional cultural values, beliefs, and lifeways in order to provide or support meaningful, beneficial, and satisfying health care, or well-being services.”

MOVING FROM THEORY INTO PRACTICE


fte year 1985 was transformative for American health care. On October 16, 1985, Margaret M. Heckler, the former secretary of HHS, released The Report of the Sec- retary’s Task Force on Black and Minority Health (Heckler Report). fte task force was composed of senior officials and scientists from governmental agencies and civilian organizations with leadership responsibilities in health care. In a little more than a year, the task force, under the chairmanship of ftomas E. Malone, PhD, deputy




Figure 19.2 Leininger’s Sunrise Model to Depict the Theory of Cultural Care Diversity and Universality. (Source: Leininger, 1991, p. 43, with permission of the National League for Nursing.)

director of the National Institutes of Health, led an in- tensive, in-depth exploration of the health status and dis- parities in access, quality of care, and outcomes ranging from infant mortality and low birth weight to chemi- cal dependency and cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease among Black and other minority populations in the United States. fte report drove the creation of new and aggressive federal initiatives to combat disparities in health care as well as new governmental offices within ex- isting federal agencies specifically commissioned to fight

disparities and promote access to high-quality health care for previously underserved populations (Malone, 1985). ftus in 1986, the Office of Minority Health (OMH) was created within the USDHHS.
   fte OMH defines cultural competence using the pio- neering work conducted by Cross and colleagues (1989) that established cultural and linguistic competence as an essential component of quality health care. fte OMH uses the following definition: “Culturally and linguisti- cally appropriate services are respectful of and responsive



to the health beliefs, practices and needs of diverse pa- tients. fte percentage of Americans who are racial and ethnic minorities and who speak a primary language other than English continues to grow rapidly. Organi- zations are looking to meet the challenges of serving di- verse communities and provide high quality services and care” (USDHHS, OMH, 2019b).
  fte mission of the OMH is “improving the health of racial and ethnic minority populations through the de- velopment of health policies and programs that will help eliminate health disparities” (USDHHS, OMH, 2019a). fterefore, the OMH has been in the forefront of our na- tion’s efforts to identify and eradicate disparities in health and health care. fte OMH employs multiple strategies to accomplish its mission, ranging from policy formulation, data collection, and research to promoting and funding demonstration programs and partnerships at the local, state, and national levels. fte OMH promotes health eq- uity through two major resources: fte Office of Minority Health Resources Center (OMHRC) and the National Standards for Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services in Health and Health Care (the National CLAS Standards) (USDHHS, OMH, 2019a).
fte OMHRC, established in 1987, houses the larg-
est collection of information in the country on health disparities, and its three core services—the Knowledge Center, Capacity Building, and Information Services— make it indispensable to health-care professionals, policy makers, consumers, researchers, and organizational rep- resentatives. fte OMHRC’s leadership has also played a pivotal role in educating both our health-care system and the institutions that educate our health profession- als in the importance of addressing SODH and of the need to move beyond “cultural sensitivity” to cultural and linguistic competency in health care. To that end, in 1995, the OMH established the Center for Linguistic and Cultural Competency in Health Care (CLCCHC) with the specific focus of working to reduce the barriers to care experienced by persons with limited English profi- ciency (LEP) (USDHHS, OMH, 2015). fte CLCCHC
partners with a wide variety of other federal entities as
well as public and private organizations to promote re- search and demonstration projects, to offer direct assis- tance, and to provide e-learning on cultural and linguistic competence to educators and practitioners in the health sciences. fte CLCCHC Web site, ftink Cultural Health



A Physician’s Practical Guide to Culturally
     Competent Care
ftis is a self-directed training course designed for physicians, physician assistants (PAs), and NPs. With growing concerns about racial and ethnic disparities in health and the need for health-care systems to accommodate increasingly diverse patient populations, cultural competence has become more and more a matter of national con- cern. ftis e-learning program will equip health- care providers with competencies that will enable them to better treat the increasingly diverse U.S. population. fte Web site has been updated to in- clude the 2013 enhanced CLAS Standards as well as more case studies, resources, and more interac- tivity (USDHHS, OMH, 2016a).
(TCH) (https://thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov), is a leader in educating health-care professionals and students in the health professions about cultural and linguistic compe- tency in health care and how to access the resources to improve practice on a personal as well as organizational level. fte Web site offers a robust continuing education e-learning program with the goal of equipping individ- uals in any discipline with the knowledge and skills to promote health and health equity through the delivery of culturally and linguistically appropriate care. Two of TCH’s free e-learning offerings described in Box 19.5 and Box 19.6 warrant your attention. fte courses, con- tact-hour information, and accompanying comments on the critical value of these courses to your practice may be accessed at https://www.thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov.

ASSESSING AND PROMOTING ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURAL AND LINGUISTIC COMPETENCY


Georgetown University’s National Center for Cultural Competence (NCCC) has articulated organizational requirements based on the five essential elements that Cross and colleagues (1989) identified as being necessary





What Is Culturally Competent Nursing Care:
     A Cornerstone of Caring?
Culturally Competent Nursing Care: A Cornerstone of Caring is a free e-learning program from the USDHHS OMH. It is approved for nine con- tinuing education credits through Cine-Med and accredited by the American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC) (USDHHS, OMH, 2016c).
   ftis e-learning program is designed to help you deliver culturally and linguistically competent care. Cultural and linguistic competency is the ca- pacity for individuals and organizations to work and communicate effectively in cross-cultural sit- uations. Cultural and linguistic competency can help improve the quality of the care you deliver to patients from diverse cultural backgrounds.
ftis e-learning program is grounded in the
National Standards for Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services (CLAS) in Health and Health Care. ftese standards are intended to advance health equity, improve quality, and help eliminate health disparities. fte National CLAS Standards provide you and other health professionals with a blueprint for increasing cultural and linguistic competency (USDHHS, OMH, 2018).
for culturally competent organizations. Cultural compe- tence requires that organizations:
• “Have a defined set of values and principles, and demonstrate behaviors, attitudes, policies, and structures that enable them to work effectively cross-culturally.
• Have the capacity to (1) value diversity, (2) conduct
self-assessment, (3) manage the dynamics of differ- ence, (4) acquire and institutionalize cultural knowl- edge, and (5) adapt to diversity and the cultural contexts of the communities they serve.
• Incorporate the above in all aspects of policy making,
administration, practice, and service delivery, and sys- tematically involve consumers, key stakeholders, and communities.
  
Cultural competence is a developmental process that evolves over an extended period. Both individuals and organizations are at various levels of awareness, knowl- edge, and skills along the cultural competence contin- uum” (NCCC, 2007).
  Note that the NCCC highlights the developmental nature of cultural competency as applied to both indi- vidual practitioners and organizations. Cultural profi- ciency is the ultimate goal for both practitioners and the organizations they serve and lead. In an environment in which health-care delivery systems are increasingly held accountable for continuous quality improvement and cost containment, APNs often straddle dual roles as cli- nicians and managers of clinical services. ftus, the APN must not only be skilled in the direct delivery of cultur- ally competent care, but also in the implementation of policies and procedures that ensure cultural competence at the organizational level.
Cultural competence is inextricably linked to linguis-
tic competence. fte essence of advanced practice nurs- ing is communication. Our ability to engage our patients as true partners in their care, to establish the trust re- lationship that is essential to building that partnership, requires that we exhibit linguistic competence. Every as- pect of our practice, from initial assessment to teaching, counseling, and support, depends on our being linguis- tically competent. fte NCCC (2020a) defines linguistic competence as follows:
Linguistic competence is the capacity of an organi- zation and its personnel to communicate effectively, and convey information in a manner that is easily understood by diverse audiences including persons of limited English proficiency, those who have low literacy skills or are not literate, individuals with dis- abilities, and those who are deaf or hard of hearing. Linguistic competence requires organizational and provider capacity to respond effectively to the health literacy needs of populations served. fte organization must have policy, structures, practices, procedures, and dedicated resources to support this capacity. (Goode et al., 2010, p. 2)
  fte definition is accompanied by a set of values and guiding principles that lay the foundation for demon- strating linguistic competence at both the individual and organizational levels, including language access.



fte NCCC Web site, https://nccc.georgetown.edu
/leadership/, provides valuable information to assist you in promoting linguistic competence within your practice setting.
   A valuable tool for assessing the cultural and linguis- tic competence of a health-care organization is Con- ducting a Cultural Competence Self-Assessment (Andrulis et al., 2014). fte tool outlines a five-step process. Over a period of 3 to 6 weeks, using an interview and ques- tionnaire format for individuals and groups, an organi- zational task force with diverse membership completes a comprehensive assessment of its organization’s ability to deliver culturally competent care. fte data are essential to driving a health-care organization’s ongoing initiatives to deliver culturally and linguistically competent care and to meeting the accreditation standards set by fte Joint Commission (TJC). Interview data are obtained from multiple sources, including community leaders, professional and support staff, clergy, interpreters, admit- ting and patient registration staff, union leadership, as well as the organization’s leadership team. fte length of the interviews range from 15 to 45 minutes. Participants are asked to bring and share any relevant materials during the interview session, and all information shared is confi- dential. Participants are reassured that the findings of the assessment will be reported in aggregate form. fte tool has 17 suggested interview questions designed to elicit information about the strengths of and barriers to the or- ganization’s ability to provide culturally competent care. fte task force members select persons within the orga- nization who in their judgment are most knowledgeable to answer the 62-item questionnaire. fte questionnaire is divided into four sections. Section 1 assesses the eth- nic and cultural characteristics of the organization’s staff. Section 2 assesses the health-care organization’s ability to meet the needs identified in Section 1, including train- ing, human resources, and union presence, if applicable. Section 3 assesses organizational links to the commu- nity and diversity initiatives for patients and staff. fte questionnaire elicits essential information about what, if any, accommodations (e.g., appointment and testing schedule, dietary needs, discharge planning) are made by the health-care organization to meet the cultural and religious preferences of the population being served. In Section 4 of the questionnaire, Language and Commu- nication Needs of Patients and Staff, the questions elicit

in-depth data about the type of interpreters and trans- lation services utilized for the care of persons with LEP.

THE AMERICAN HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION AND THE HEALTH RESEARCH AND
EDUCATIONAL TRUST


In 2003, the American Hospital Association (AHA) re- placed the Patients’ Bill of Rights with The Patient Care Partnership. ftis document is in the form of an easy- to-read brochure that seeks to integrate patients’ values and beliefs into their care and describes what patients should expect during their hospitalization with respect to their rights and responsibilities. fte brochure is avail- able in eight languages (English, Arabic, traditional and simplified Chinese, Spanish, Russian, Vietnamese, and Tagalog) and may be downloaded in English from the AHA Web site (http://www.aha.org/content/00-10
/pcp_english_030730.pdf).
  fte AHA and its education affiliate, the Health Re- search and Educational Trust (HRET), have produced multiple products for use by staff and an organiza- tion’s leadership team to enhance culturally competent care within the United States. fte resources listed in Box 19.7 are particularly relevant to the delivery of cul- turally and linguistically competent care.
   It is important to note that the Diversity and Cultural Proficiency Assessment Tool for Leaders seeks to move the goal of caregiving from culturally competent care to culturally proficient care (AHA, 2004, p. 4). fte four-part assessment tool is comprehensive, containing not only an evidence-based diversity checklist but also recommended action steps, case studies, and an extensive bibliography.
  fte HRET Disparities Toolkit is designed for use in a wide variety of settings, ranging from hospitals to private health-care practices and community health centers. It specifically addresses best practices for obtaining accu- rate race, ethnicity, and primary-language data from per- sons with LEP or visual or hearing deficits. Both of these tools, as well as the other resources listed, are invaluable tools for promoting staff and organizational linguistic proficiency.
   In addition to creating resources that promote cul- tural competence in health care, the AHA was instru- mental in the development of the Institute for Diversity



Box 19.7Resources for Delivering Culturally and Linguistically Competent Care• Strategies  for  Leadership:  Does Your  Hospi-	_culturally_competent_health_care_organiza tal Reflect the Community It Serves? A Diver-	tion.PDF.
sity and Cultural Proficiency Assessment Tool	• AboutTeamSTEPPS (AHRQ, 2019a), accessi-
for Leaders (AHA, NCHL, IFD, & ACHE,	ble at https://www.ahrq.gov/teamstepps/about 2004), accessible at https://www.aha.org (en-	-teamstepps/index.html
ter  the  title  of  the  document  in  the  Search	• Resources on Health Equity and Value. Institute
box to bring up a PDF that can be downloaded),	for Diversity and Health Equity (affiliate of the or from https://www.aha.org/system/files/2018-02	AHA)  (2020b).  Accessible  at https://ifdhe.aha
/DiversityTool.pdf	.org/resources-health-equity-and-value
• fte HRET Disparities Toolkit, accessible at http:// • Community Health and Equity Resources at www.hretdisparities.org  (Hasnain-Wynia  et  al.,	the American Hospital Association (2019). 2007)	Retrieved   from   https://www.aha.org/system/files
• Equity of Care: A Toolkit for Eliminating Health	/media/file/2019/10/AHA-Community-Health
Care Disparities, accessible at http://www.hpoe	-and-Equity-Resources.pdf
.org/Reports-HPOE/equity-of-care-toolkit. • Resources on Inclusion and Diversity. Institute pdf (AHA, 2015a), and #123forEquity: A Tool-	for Diversity and Health Equity (affiliate of the kit  for  Achieving  Success  and Sharing Your	AHA) (2020c). Accessible at https://ifdhe.aha.org Story, accessible at http://www.equityofcare.org	/resources-inclusion-and-diversity
/resources/resources/AHA123forEquityTool	• Advancing Health for  LGBTQ  Communities.
kitweb.pdf (AHA, 2015b)	Institute for Diversity and Health (affiliate of the
• Becoming   a   Culturally  Competent  Health	AHA) (2020a). Accessible at https://ifdhe.aha Care Organization (HRET,  2013), accessible at	.org/advancing-health-lgbtq-communities http://www.hpoe.org/Reports-HPOE/becoming


in Health Management, founded in 1994. fte institute is a nonprofit organization that works with educational institutions and health-care organizations to expand leadership opportunities for ethnic minorities in man- agement of health care. In 2017, the institute expanded its focus to embrace health equity and was renamed the Institute for Diversity and Health Equity (IFDHE, 2018). Its Web site is https://ifdhe.aha.org.

LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY MANDATES AND ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE HEALTH-CARE INDUSTRY

In addition to the professional imperative that APNs be culturally and linguistically competent, a variety of

federal agencies issue regulations affecting health care and health-care providers. Of most immediate impor- tance are the personal legal implications of failing to practice in a culturally and linguistically appropriate manner. fte care that is documented in a patient’s clin- ical record is a direct reflection of your practice. If cul- tural and linguistic barriers exist between you and your patients and you have not instituted action to address these in your history taking, clinical decision making, and patient education, treatment failure and adverse outcomes may well occur. From a legal perspective, what is not documented has not been done. In our increas- ingly litigious society, failure to document culturally appropriate care may well serve as an ethical and legal indictment of your practice with very real professional repercussions.



   Individual, organizational, and system vulnerabil- ity to legal action may also result from failure to com- ply with the provisions of Section 601 of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, 42 U.S.C.
§ 2000d et seq., which states the following: “No person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance” (FindLaw, 2017).
   Previous court decisions involving Title VI have em- ployed the Fourteenth Amendment’s standard of proof of intentional discrimination as well as Title VI’s require- ment for demonstration of “disparate impact.” Health- care institutions receiving federal assistance whose programs or policies discriminate against particular cul- tural groups are liable to be held accountable under the provisions of Title VI. For example, the Supreme Court has held that undocumented immigrants fulfill the defi- nition of “persons” in the context of the Fifth and Four- teenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution. As such, they are, by extension, included under the protections afforded by Title VI. Keep in mind that federal assistance has been broadly defined as encompassing not only di- rect financial assistance but also forms of indirect aid such as subsidies, loans, and federal training (Govinfo, 2020, Section 2-202, p. 4391).
On August 11, 2000, Executive Order 13166 was
issued: Improving Access to Services for Persons with Lim- ited English Proficiency (U.S. Department of Justice [USDOJ], Office of Civil Rights [OCR], 2019). fte executive order required all federal agencies that funded nonfederal program(s) to publish guidance to recipients of such funding as to how they could comply with the provisions of Title VI. To minimize confusion and max- imize compliance across all federal agencies, adoption of the uniform criteria established by the USDOJ was encouraged. fte current regulatory guidelines of the USDHHS that went into effect in October 2004 define persons with LEP as follows (USDHHS, OCR, 2013, Section IV): “Individuals who do not speak English as their primary language and who have a limited ability to read, write, speak, or understand English may be limited English proficient, or ‘LEP,’ and may be eligible to re- ceive language assistance with respect to a particular type of service, benefit, or encounter.”
  
fte regulations developed by the USDHHS pursu- ant to Section 602 of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 forbid recipients from “utilizing criteria or meth- ods of administration which have the effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination because of their race, color, or national origin, or have the effect of defeating or sub- stantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program with respect to individuals of a particular race, color, or national origin” (USDHHS, OCR, 2013, Section 1:45 C.F.R. 80.3[b][2]).
   fte guidelines identify the types of USDHHS recip- ients who must comply with the provisions of Title VI, including hospitals and nursing homes; state Medicaid programs; Head Start programs; managed care organiza- tions; and state, county, and local health agencies. ftey also identify the four criteria that programs and institu- tions can use to determine the level of resources that must be invested to ensure compliance: (a) the number or pro- portion of persons with LEP eligible to be served or likely to be encountered by the program or grantee; (b) the fre- quency with which individuals with LEP come in contact with the program; (c) the nature and importance of the program, activity, or service provided by the program to people’s lives; and (d) the resources available to the grantee or recipient and costs (USDHHS, OCR, 2013).
In 2000, the OMH of the USDHHS released the
National Standards for Culturally and Linguistically Ap- propriate Services (CLAS) in Health and Health Care. ftese standards were developed in response to docu- mented disparities in access to and quality of health- related services to an increasingly diverse population. ftey were designed to help health-care organizations develop services that would promote culturally compe- tent care with the goal of ultimately eliminating dispar- ities and promoting better health. In 2010, the OCR of the USDHHS undertook a comprehensive review of the original CLAS requirements; and in 2013, the OMH of the USDHHS issued a revised, enhanced set of CLAS Standards and a blueprint for effective implementation. fte 15 standards are organized under three  themes:
(1) Governance, Leadership, and Workforce; (2) Com-
munication and Language Assistance; and (3) Engage- ment, Continuous Improvement, and Accountability. fte revised 2013 CLAS Standards and the blueprint for implementation may be accessed at https://thinkcultural health.hhs.gov (USDHHS, OMH, 2013).



  fte Enhanced CLAS Standards have strengthened the original standards in many ways. fte definition of health has been expanded and a new standard on Or- ganizational Governance and Leadership holds an orga- nization’s leadership accountable for promoting CLAS and the goal of health equity not only through policy and practices but also by resource allocation. An orga- nization cannot meet Standards 3 and 4, which call for recruiting and supporting a culturally and linguistically diverse workforce at all levels of the organization and ongoing education and training at all levels of the work- force in culturally and linguistically appropriate policies and practices, without providing the necessary funding to do so.
Other notable changes in the Enhanced CLAS Stan-
dards (USDHHS, OMH, 2013) are the following:
• Replacing the terms patients and consumers with indi- viduals and groups. fte new terms are more inclusive and encompass patients, families, clients, and caregiv- ers (pp. 10–11).
• Beginning each standard with an action word, rein-
forcing the expectation that the standards are to be actively promoted within each health-care organiza- tion (p. 11).
• Using themes in CLAS 2013 that are more dynamic
and inclusive (pp. 11–12). ftemes from 2000 and 2013 are compared in Table 19.1.
  
It should be noted that Standards 4 through 8, which address the needs of persons with LEP, represent stan- dards that are covered by the provisions of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and affect any organization that receives federal funding. ftese standards are as follows:
STANDARD 4: Educate and train governance, lead- ership, and workforce in culturally and linguistically appropriate policies and practices on an ongoing basis (USDHHS, OMH, 2013, p. 66).
STANDARD 5: Offer language assistance to individ- uals who have limited English proficiency and/or other communication need, at no cost to them, to facilitate timely access to all health care and services (USDHHS, OMH, 2013, p. 72).
STANDARD 6: Inform all individuals of the avail- ability of language assistance services clearly and in their preferred language, verbally and in writing (USDHHS, OMH, 2013, p. 79).
STANDARD 7: Ensure the competence of individuals providing language assistance services, recognizing that the use of untrained individuals and/or minors as interpreters should be avoided (USDHHS, OMH, 2013, p. 85).
STANDARD 8: Provide easy-to-read print and multi- media materials and signage in the languages com- monly used by the populations in the service area (USDHHS, OMH, 2013, p. 93).



   TaBle 19.1	
Comparison of Selected CLAS Themes: 2000 and 2013

2000 CLAS Themes2013 CLAS ThemesNo Principal StandardStandard 1: Provide effective, equitable, understandable, and respectful quality care and services that are responsive to diverse cultural health beliefs and practices, preferred languages, health literacy, and other communication needs. Standard 1 is only attainable IF the remaining 14 standards are fully and consistently implemented (p. 31).Culturally Competent CareGovernance, Leadership, and Workforce. (p. 31)Language Access ServicesCommunication and Language Assistance (p. 32)Organizational SupportsEngagement, Continuous Improvement, and Accountability (p. 32)Source: From U. S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Minority Health. (2013). National standards for culturally and linguistically appropriate services in health and health care: A blueprint for advancing and sustaining CLAS policy and practice. Retrieved from https://thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov
/pdfs/EnhancedCLASStandardsBlueprint.pdf



   Several states have taken active steps to promote the incorporation of the CLAS Standards. fte most fre- quent action was the development of strategic planning documents and the establishment of partnerships to fa- cilitate the implementation of their recommendations. fte next most frequent state action was wide dissemina- tion of the Enhanced CLAS Standards through a variety of vehicles including newsletters, conferences, toolkits, training, and technical assistance. fte OMH has tracked this information and issued a report entitled National Standards for Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services in Health and Health Care: Compendium of State- Sponsored National CLAS Standards Implementation Ac- tivities. fte report may be accessed and downloaded at https://www.thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov/pdfs/CLAS- Compendium.pdf (USDHHS, OMH, 2016b).
   In 2014, TJC produced two critical documents de- signed to promote health equity and to facilitate their accredited institutions meeting the Enhanced CLAS Standards. ftese were A Crosswalk of the National Standards for Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services (CLAS) in Health and Health Care to The Joint Commission Hospital Accreditation Standards (TJC, 2014b), accessible at https://www.jointcommission. org/-/media/deprecated-unorganized/imported-assets/ tjc/system-folders/assetmanager/crosswalk-_clas_- 20140718pdf.pdf?db=web&hash=8F2B3D45FAF DE585072542F630517F22, and A Crosswalk of the National Standards for Culturally and Linguistically Ap- propriate Services (CLAS) in Health and Health Care to The Joint Commission Ambulatory Health Care Accredi- tation Standards (TJC, 2014a), accessible at https:// www.jointcommission.org/-/media/deprecated- unorganized/imported-assets/tjc/system-folders/ topics-library/crosswalk_clas_ahc_20141110pdf. pdf?db=web&hash=1A9119E24EF51B941108E 0A3FF731DD3.
   In addition, TJC prepared a short (three-page) over- view of how to meet the needs of persons with LEP. It is accessible at: https://www.jointcommission.org/-/ media/tjc/documents/newsletters/quick-safety-issue-13- lep-5-27-15-final2.pdf.
   TJC also took the lead in addressing the health-care needs of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) persons, a population that has long experienced discrimi- nation not only in health and access to quality health-care

services but in many other aspects of their lives as well. It had become increasingly clear to TJC that the generic accreditation standards did not adequately address the needs of the LGBT community. With funding from fte California Endowment, TJC worked with representatives from the LGBT community and an expert advisory panel to create a document that would promote health equity for this underserved population. In 2011, TJC released Advancing Effective Communication, Cultural Compe- tence, and Patient- and Family-Centered Care for the Les- bian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) Community: A Field Guide. fte field guide is organized around five domains, each containing strategies and recommenda- tions identified by the LGBTQ+ community as being the most in need of action: (1) leadership; (2) provision of care, treatment, and services; (3) workforce; (4) data col- lection and use; and (5) patient, family and community engagement (TJC, 2011a, p. 4). An additional TJC re- source for the care of all persons is the April 2016 issue of the TJC newsletter Quick Safety, which has an excellent 4-page article entitled “Implicit Bias in Health Care.” It may be accessed at  https://www.jointcommission.org/-
/media/tjc/documents/newsletters/quick-safety-issue-23
-apr-2016-final-rev.pdf.
  fte AHRQ has sought to partner with the nation’s hospitals to promote patient safety and positive health outcomes. In 2012, the AHRQ published a monograph entitled “Improving Patient Safety Systems for Patients with Limited English Proficiency: A Guide for Hospitals” (Betancourt et al., 2012). fte guide approaches the goal of patient safety holistically, seeking to assist hospitals to create environments and cultures that promote safety for increasingly diverse patient populations. Multiple areas are addressed with particular emphasis on the need for strong collaboration between the staff and leadership of each facility. Everyone is seen as having a vested interest in—and responsibility for—achieving a culture of safety that maximizes optimal patient outcomes. fte foreword to the guide was written by Rich Umbdenstock, then president and CEO of the AHA, who addressed the im- portance of cultural competence as essential to quality patient-centered care. In addition to praising the solid evidence-based research underlying the document, he also praised its vitality, noting that it offers strategies; training, documentation, and evaluation tools; and access to mate- rials from a wide array of sources. He identified one of the



eight modules in the guide as being particularly valuable to hospitals as they work to maximize the care of their di- verse patient populations—the TeamSTEPPS LEP train- ing module, which explores team behaviors and structured communication tools that promote patient safety. fte team approach permeates the entire guide (Betancourt et al., 2012, pp. iii and 31–36). TeamSTEPPS training has been so successful that the program has grown from five to seven regional training centers, which prepare Mas- ter TeamSTEPPS Trainers, who work with hospitals and other health-care facilities to train personnel and to plan and implement the interprofessional training. fte seven regional training sites in the National Implementation of TeamSTEPPS Project are the following:
• Northwell Health (formerly known as North Shore- Long Island Jewish Health System) in New Hyde Park, New York
• Duke University Health System Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina
• MetroHealth, medical center and 17 health centers in the Greater Cleveland, Ohio, metropolitan region
• Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana
• University of Minnesota Fairview Medical Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota
• University of Washington Medicine, Seattle,
Washington
• UCLA Health, Los Angeles, California
(AHRQ, 2017b)


USE OF INTERPRETER
AND TRANSLATOR SERVICES

fte Migration Policy Institute estimates that 25.6 mil- lion persons living in the United States have limited En- glish proficiency. Among these, 81.8% (20.8 million) were immigrants, and Spanish was the most frequent language, other than English, spoken at home in all but four states—Alaska, Hawaii, Maine, and Vermont (Batalova et al., 2020). Language assistance, such as access to translation services, health education materials written in a known language, and other resources are required by law; but not all patients have access to these services at their usual source of care. ftis is especially true during health-care crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Recognizing the potential impact of the pandemic on

the care of persons with LEP, the OCR of the USDHHS issued a bulletin entitled “Ensuring the Rights of Persons with Limited English Proficiency in Health Care During COVID-19.” fte bulletin contains guidance to health- care facilities covered by the OCR as well as an extensive list of resources available to health-care entities from mul- tiple federal agencies (USDHHS, OCR, 2020).
   TJC requires its accredited health-care entities to col- lect data about each patient’s preferred language when discussing their health care. Such information becomes the basis for determining if an interpreter is required for the provider-patient encounter and/or if additional language-access resources at the organizational level will be needed to provide comprehensive care (TJC, 2020).
   As an APN, you know the importance of effective communication to every facet of a person’s care from as- sessment to adherence to your jointly developed plan of care. With the increasing diversity of the populations for whom we care, access to timely and effective interpreter and translator services is essential to providing high-quality care, achieving good patient outcomes, and avoiding the legal consequences of inadequate care. As an advocate for the quality of your own practice, as well as for your pa- tients, it is essential to take an active role in assessing the services in the organizations within which you practice. Are the services you need available to you when you need them? What are the qualifications of the interpreters and translators? Are they certified by a major certifying body? Examples of certifying bodies include the National Board for Certification of Medical Interpreters (NBCMI) and the Certification Commission for Healthcare Interpreters (CCHI). Are interpreters required to complete ongoing continuing education? What training do they receive (e.g., Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act [HIPAA], medical terminology, cultural competence, eth- ics, mental health, domestic violence, trauma)? Are the services available in multiple modes—on-site, telephonic, interactive video? Video interpreting actively incorporates the interpreter into the caregiving process. A skilled in- terpreter in an on-site or video encounter will not only facilitate patient-provider communication but can be a valuable asset in picking up nonverbal cues from the pa- tient that lead the provider to seek additional information or clarification. ftis can be critically important if you practice in a setting where the length of appointments has been shortened and you are trying to record data while you care for your patient, which gives you less opportunity


to pick up subtle clues. Skilled interpreters and translators are critical members of the health-care team and should be valued and treated as such.
   Two of the major language-access service providers are CyraCom and Language Access Network (LAN). If you are thinking of starting your own practice, a very useful resource is “Incorporating Medical Interpretation into Your Practice.” It can be downloaded as a free pdf file from the Family Practice Management Web site at https://www
.aafp.org/fpm/2014/0300/p16.html (Moch et al., 2014).



HEALTH LITERACY AND NUMERACY: PREVALENCE AND CLINICAL
IMPLICATIONS

In 2004, the IOM brought the issue of health illit- eracy to national attention with a comprehensive study of health literacy and its impact on health out- comes, Health Literacy: A Prescription to End Confusion (Nielsen-Bohlman et al., 2004). Key findings can be found in Box 19.8. fte report brings the impact of defi- cient health literacy dramatically to light in the following case example (Parker et al., 2003, p. 150):
A two-year-old is diagnosed with an inner ear infection and prescribed an antibiotic. Her mother understands that her child has an ear infection and knows she should take the prescribed medication twice a day. After look- ing at the label on the bottle and deciding that it does not tell how to take the medicine, she fills a teaspoon and pours the antibiotic into her daughter’s ear.
   Cultural competence must be operationalized within the context of health literacy. fte definition of health literacy that was used in the National Action Plan to Im- prove Health Literacy (USDHHS, ODPHP, 2010b) was “the degree to which a person can obtain, process, and understand basic health information and services needed to make appropriate health decisions” (Ratzan & Parker, 2000). fte National Action Plan to Improve Health Liter- acy is built upon two principles:
1. Everyone has the right to health information that helps them to make informed decisions.
2. Health services should be delivered in ways that are understandable and beneficial to health, longevity, and quality of life (USDHHS, ODPHP, 2010c, p. 1).
















   fte population data cited in the National Action Plan to Improve Health Literacy and from which this national action initiative was developed were drawn from the National Assessment of Adult Literacy (NAAL), com- missioned by the U.S. Department of Education and conducted in 2003. fte NAAL was the last major study of adult literacy to be conducted in the United States; it was the first time that NAAL had included health lit- eracy in its data collection (Kutner et al., 2006). Citing findings from Healthy People 2010, the action plan starts from the premise that to effectively navigate today’s health-care system and to understand and act on much of the health and disease-related information dispensed today, a person must ideally be proficient in health liter- acy (USDHHS, ODHP, 2010c, p. 8). ftis presents a real challenge to health-care providers, especially APNs,



who often care for some of our country’s most vulnerable persons.
   Key findings from the NAAL cited in the National Action Plan to Improve Health Literacy include the following:
• Limited health literacy affected 9 out of 10 Americans surveyed.
• Only 12% of those surveyed demonstrated a proficient
level of health literacy.
• fte subpopulations most likely to have limited health literacy were:
• Adults older than the age of 65 years
• Racial and ethnic groups other than White
• Recent refugees and immigrants
• People with less than a high school degree or GED
• People with incomes at or below the poverty level
• Non-native speakers of English (USDHHS, ODHP, 2010c, p. 8)
  fte NAAL data also suggest that persons with less than basic literacy skills may not even be able to read and understand a chart or simple instructions and that 42% of this same population group describe their health as being poor. fte data also suggest that 54 million adults with any type of disability or illness are more likely to have the lowest levels of literacy (USDHHS, ODHP, 2010c, p. 9).
In March 2011, the AHRQ released Health Literacy
Interventions and Outcomes: An Updated Systematic Review. Evidence report/technology assessment No. 199 (Berkman et al., 2011). fte report used the definition of health lit- eracy proposed by Ratzan and Parker (2000) that encom- passes oral communication skills and numeracy and that was used in Healthy People 2010 and by the IOM in their 2004 report on health literacy. Review of research studies rated as being “fair” or “good” demonstrated that lower health literacy was associated with increased hospitaliza- tion, increased use of emergency care, lower use of influ- enza vaccine, and lower use of screening mammography (Berkman et al., 2011, p. ES-4). Two of the studies re- viewed suggested that lower numeracy skills mediated the relationship between race and HbA1C values and between gender and self-care management of HIV medication reg- imens (Berkman et al., 2011, p. ES–6).
Health literacy is directly linked to English language
proficiency. Using American Community Survey data from 2009 to 2013, the U.S. Census Bureau compiled

detailed tables of the language spoken at home and the ability of persons 5 years of age and older to speak En- glish. Table 1, released in October 2015, reported that 60,361,574 persons 5 years of age and older speak a language other than English at home. fte majority, 37,458,624, reported speaking Spanish or Spanish Cre- ole at home. Of the almost 37.5 million persons who re- ported speaking Spanish at home, 16,344,473 reported that they spoke English less than “very well” (U.S. Cen- sus Bureau, 2015). In 2018, 18.5% of persons who spoke Spanish at home were living below the poverty line; 81.5% were at or above the poverty line (U.S. Cen- sus Bureau, 2018). ftese data paint a picture of millions of potential patients, many of whom are children, who are at high risk for limited access, inadequate care, and inability to acquire the self-care management knowledge and skills essential to maintain health and optimum function. Cultural beliefs and practices, low educational attainment, LEP, and poverty are all barriers to accessing and effectively using health-care resources. When these barriers converge, the negative effects of each individual barrier are magnified.
Low health literacy has a direct impact on the use
of emergency departments (EDs), especially for pediat- ric patients. In 2011 to 2012, Morrison and colleagues explored the relationship between the health literacy of caregivers and nonurgent ED visits for children present- ing with fever. In the study, 299 caregivers bringing chil- dren ranging from 67 days to 12 years of age to the ED for a complaint of fever completed a literacy tool, the Newest Vital Sign (NVS). Only caregivers who spoke ei- ther English or Spanish were included in the study, and any child who was in acute distress or had an underlying condition warranting urgent testing—such as sickle cell disease—was excluded from the study. fte median age of the children was 2 years, and 34% of the children had an underlying chronic disease (p. 506). Of the care- givers, 63% demonstrated low health literacy (p. 506). It is interesting to note, however, that in this study a relationship between health literacy and nonurgent ED visits for pediatric patients was found for English- and Spanish-speaking caregivers but not for Black caregivers (Morrison et al., 2014). Building on the growing body of scholarship regarding health literacy, in 2018 the Na- tional Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine held a national workshop entitled “Community-Based Health Literacy Interventions.” fte proceedings make



it clear that many major barriers still exist to achieving health literacy. fte workshop proceedings may be ac- cessed at https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29543418/. Multiple tools are available to clinicians to assess the literacy of their patients. An examination of Table 19.2

reveals that these tools assess the literacy component of health literacy. Although reading comprehension and an understanding of commonly used medical terms are essential components of health literacy, such under- standing does not necessarily translate into the ability


   TaBle 19.2	
Health Literacy Assessment Tools


Name of Tool
Format of the Tool
Test AdministrationApproximate Completion Time(s)Rapid Estimate of AdultA 66-item word recognition testThe individual is asked to pronounce2–6 minutes (WallaceLiteracy in Medicineof commonly used medical terms.words in ascending order of difficulty.et al., 2006)(REALM)A version for patients with visualimpairments uses a font size of 28.Rapid Estimate of AdultA seven-item, rapid screening, wordThe individual is asked to pronounceUnder 2 minutesLiteracy in Medicine–recognition test.words in ascending order of difficulty.(Arozullah et al., 2007)Short Form, revised(REALM-SF)Rapid Estimate of Adolescent Literacy in Medicine: REALM-TeenA 66-item word recognition test. Appropriate for adolescents ages 10–17. Available only in English.The individual is asked to pronounce words in ascending order of difficulty.Under 3 minutes (Davis et al., 2006)Test of FunctionalThe original TOFHLA is a 67-item timedThe individual replaces the missing22 minutes (TOFHLA);Health Literacy intest of reading comprehension (50 items)words in paragraphs from four multiple-about 7 minutesAdults: original andand numerical ability (17 items).choice options for each missing word.(S-TOFHLA) (Wallace,short versionsAvailable in both English and Spanish2006)(TOFHLA andand in regular (12 pt) and large (14 pt)S-TOFHLA)font.Short Assessment of Health Literacy for Spanish Adults (SAHLSA-50)A 50-item tool, based on the REALM, that measures the ability of
Spanish-speaking adults to read and understand commonly used medical terms.Each medical term is followed by two words, one of which is similar in meaning to the medical term; the other is a distracter. The person is asked to read the medical term aloud and to select the word that is similar in meaning.3–6 minutes (Lee et al., 2006)Short Assessment of Health Literacy– Spanish & English (SAHL-S&E)An 18-item tool that tests the ability to pronounce and understand common medical terms.Each medical term is followed by two words, one of which is similar in meaning to the medical term; the other is a distracter. The person is asked to read the medical term aloud and to select the word that is similar in meaning.2–3 minutes (Lee et al., 2010)Newest Vital Sign (NVS)A six-question tool that tests the ability to read, comprehend, and apply the nutritional information on an ice cream label; tests both reading comprehension and numeracy skills. Available in both English and Spanish.The person is given the NVS label to read and refer to as needed. The practitioner then asks the six questions.3 minutes (Weiss et al., 2005)Source: In addition to the above tools, a wide variety of additional tools are available at Health Literacy ToolShed (http://healthliteracy.bu.edu), a database of health literacy measures.



to navigate the system to obtain the health-care services that promote improved health outcomes.
   It is important to note, too, that most of the tools used to assess health literacy do not address numeracy; for example, the ability of a person to actually compre- hend the meaning of numerical data presented and to then use that comprehension to carry out mathemati- cal processes to make informed decisions. Numeracy is critical if Americans are to benefit from the steps being taken by the federal government to provide more infor- mation about lifestyle behaviors. On May 27, 2016, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) finalized the new nutrition facts label for packaged foods. One goal of the redesign was to improve the public’s understanding of the information presented on the label. fte new label- ing requirements are also an attempt to combat chronic diseases, such as obesity and heart disease, by helping consumers to make more informed choices that may re- sult in changes in dietary behaviors. Some of the more important changes are the following (USFDA, 2016):
• fte type size for calories, serving size per container, and serving size was increased, and the number of calories and the “serving size” was boldfaced.
• fte amount (in grams) of “added sugars” and the per-
cent of that amount relative to the 2015 to 2020 Di- etary Guidelines for Americans was added.
• Actual amounts, as well as the percent of daily value
(DV), of vitamin D, iron, calcium, and potassium must be listed on the label.
   Manufacturers were required to comply with the new labeling requirements by July 26, 2018. To review the full FDA document, go to https://www.fda.gov/food
/food-labeling-nutrition/changes-nutrition-facts-label. Another document that may be useful in teach-
ing patients dietary information is “How to Under- stand and Use the Nutrition Facts Label” (USFDA, 2020).  It   can  be  retrieved  from  https://www
.fda.gov/food/new-nutrition-facts-label/how-under stand-and-use-nutrition-facts-label.

TRANSCREATION

Health literacy is not simply about English proficiency. Even if one is proficient in speaking, reading, and writing

English, all individuals process communication with health-care providers in terms of interpersonal dynamics and through the lens of cultural beliefs and practices. Lit- eral translation of patient education materials, discharge instructions, consent forms, and other written and mul- timedia patient materials often does not achieve their in- tended purpose because the content is not presented in a culturally congruent manner. We need to think beyond translation to transcreation, which is development of all forms of information within a cultural context.
   A driving force for the development of transcreated educational materials and interactive Web sites were find- ings from a pilot study of Chinese Americans. Partici- pants between the ages of 18 and 70 were diagnosed with diabetes at least 1 year earlier and were taking either oral agents or insulin. fte study, conducted by Hsu and col- leagues (2006), consisted of 52 subjects, 91% of whom had type 2 diabetes. Twenty-two of the subjects indicated a preference for English, and 30 indicated Chinese as their preferred language. fte Chinese American subjects who indicated a preference for Chinese demonstrated less knowledge about their disease process and had higher hemoglobin A1C levels than did the subjects for whom English was the preferred language. ftese differences oc- curred even though the care to all subjects in the study was delivered in culturally competent sites with ready ac- cess to translation services. Another interesting finding of the study was that a significantly greater proportion of the English-language preference Chinese immigrant subjects (36.4%) reported diabetes educators as a source of in- formation, compared with Chinese-language preference Chinese immigrant subjects (3.3%) (Hsu et al., 2006).
Asian  Americans  are  the  fastest-growing popula-
tion group in the United States, increasing from 14.7 million in 2010 (Humes et al., 2010) to an estimated
22.6 million in 2018 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2020b). ftis population is more at risk for developing type 2 diabetes than non-Hispanic Whites even though their body weight is lower. Chinese Americans, 50% of whom self-report being “linguistically isolated,” constitute the greatest percentage of Asian Americans. fte Joslin Dia- betes Center, a teaching affiliate of the Harvard Medical School, has led the development of culturally appropri- ate care sites and educational materials for Asian Amer- icans and Latino Americans with, or at risk for, diabetes (Joslin,  2020a).  Joslin’s   Asian  American  Diabetes



Initiative (AADI), established in 2000, provides cultur- ally proficient care to Asian patients. fte AADI’s edu- cational materials, including the Joslin Clinic’s clinical guidelines for the prevention, detection, and treatment of diabetes, are available in English, traditional Chinese and simplified Chinese, and Japanese. Like the AADI, Joslin’s Latino American Diabetes Initiative (LADI) offers comprehensive care and educational materials in both English and Spanish (Joslin, 2020a, 2020b).
   An increasing number of other health-care organiza- tions are developing educational materials and programs that reflect transcreation and are both linguistically and culturally appropriate for the target populations they serve. ftree notable examples are described in the text that follows.

Immigrant Health and Cancer Disparities Service
fte Immigrant Health and Cancer Disparities Service (IHCD) has been housed at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) since 2011 and is directed by Dr. Francesca M. Gany (MSKCC, 2020). It is part of MSK’s Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and may be accessed at  https://www.mskcc
.org/departments/psychiatry-behavioral-sciences
/immigrant-health. fte IHCD has programs to tackle some of the most pervasive health problems in immi- grants and other medically underserved people, including the following:
• Arab Health Initiative: Offers patient education and support services to help Arab Americans obtain cancer treatment as well as research to promote health out- comes in Arab Americans.
• South Asian Health Initiative: Provides health-care ser-
vices and outreach to the South Asian community in the New York metropolitan area.
• Ventanillas de Salud (Health Windows) at the Mexican
Consulate: Works to eliminate barriers to access to health care and promotes disease prevention and health awareness for Mexican Americans in New York City.
• Chinese American Cancer Care Access Program: Focuses
on reducing disparities in health and cancer care in Chinese Americans through partnerships and col- laboration with community-based organizations and health-care providers.

fte  service’s  Web  site  (https://www.mskcc.org
/departments/psychiatry-behavioral-sciences/immigrant
-health) has separate portals for adult, child, and teen; health professionals; and research scientists and pro- vides users with a comprehensive description of the resources available to each group. fte Web site also provides access to MSK’s virtual library (https://www
.mskcc.org/vp) through which patients and their care- givers can access a wide range of online patient education and support.

National Cancer Institute
fte National Cancer Institute’s (NCI’s) Office of Communications and Public Liaison maintains an English-language Web site at http://www.cancer.gov/ and a Spanish-language site at http://www.cancer.gov
/espanol. Services to consumers and clinicians include a comprehensive list of publications produced by the NCI on a wide variety of subjects (e.g., childhood can- cer, coping and support, clinical trials, screening). fte publications are available in multiple formats and can be downloaded to a smartphone, tablet, or e-book device or opened as pdf documents in a browser. ftere is also an option to order free copies of the publications online. One of the NCI’s transcreated booklets, Facing Forward: Life After Cancer Treatment (NCI, 2018a) or its Spanish version, Siga adelante: la vida después del tratamiento del Cáncer (NCI, 2018b) is particularly useful for patient education.
fte staff of NCI’s Cancer Information Services (CIS)
are available to direct you to sources of information and publications in languages other than English or Spanish. Two of the resources recommended are the National Net- work of Libraries of Medicine’s (NNLM’s) Consumer Health Information in Many Languages Resources page (https://nnlm.gov/consumer-health-information-many- languages-resources) and the American Cancer Society Asian and Pacific Islander Cancer Education Materials Web Tool (APICEM). APICEM is a joint project of the Asian American Network for Cancer Awareness, Research and Training (AANCART) and the American Cancer Society (ACS) and was funded by the NCI. It is designed to help Asians and Pacific Islanders and offers persons with LEP access to information about cancer in 12 languages in addition to English. fte languages range



from Spanish and Chinese to Hindi, Arabic, and Viet- namese. ftis resource may be accessed at https://www
.cancer.org/cancer-information-in-other-languages.
   NCI’s information specialists also provide person- alized, confidential cancer and smoking-cessation in- formation services by telephone at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237) or through the LiveChat link on NCI’s Web site (https://www.cancer.gov). NCI’s Live Help service is available from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. Eastern Time, Monday through Friday, directly from http:// LiveHelp.cancer.gov (English) or https://LiveHelp-es
.cancer.gov (Spanish).
  NCI’s Smoking Quitline, 1-877-44U-QUIT (1-877-448-7848), is available Monday through Friday from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. Eastern Time in both English and Spanish. Each state also has quitlines, whose hours of op- eration vary. fte following number connects the caller directly to a counselor at their state’s quitline: 800-784- 8669. A valuable resource to complement the outreach of the Quitline staff is https://www.Smokefree.gov with population-specific resources and support for veterans, women, teens, and older (60+) adults. ftis resource is provided jointly by NCI, NIH, and the USDHHS. fte no-cost Smokefree apps QuitGuide and quitStart can be downloaded to patients’ smartphones for 24/7 smoking- cessation help and support.

Office of Minority Health
fte OMH of the USDHHS (http://minorityhealth.hhs
.gov/) sponsors the website ftink Cultural Health. You can join at no cost by registering online at https://think culturalhealth.hhs.gov. Registration provides preferential access to a wide variety of resources, which will keep you up to date on the latest developments in cultural and linguistic competency and initiatives being undertaken by the OMH. Both Web sites provide access to the Na- tional Standards on CLAS, online training, and continu- ing education.

PATIENT NAVIGATOR PROGRAM

Vulnerable populations are known to experience sig- nificant difficulty in “navigating” the health-care sys- tem. fte interplay of barriers such as poverty, LEP, and

dependence on overburdened, publicly funded health facilities that often lack evening and weekend services for nonurgent care leaves many patients feeling over- whelmed by the complexity of the system. Patients’ fail- ures to follow through on diagnostic tests and referrals and to obtain and take their medications as prescribed are usually ascribed to their being “noncompliant.” Often, if you dig deeper, noncompliance represents an inability to access the services necessary to facilitate adherence to their prescribed health-care regimen. In Crossing the Quality Chasm, the IOM, quoting the Picker Institute and the AHA, put it bluntly: “It is not surpris- ing, then, that studies of patient experience document that the health system for some is a ‘nightmare’ to navi- gate” (IOM, 2001a, p. 4).
fte potential for wide-scale implementation of
patient-navigator programs to reduce disparities in health and access to high-quality health-care services garnered support in Congress. On April 25, 2005, Rep- resentative Robert Menendez introduced H.R. 1812, fte Patient Navigator, Outreach and Chronic Disease Prevention Act (PNDP), to amend the Public Health Service Act. fte amendment authorized the secretary of HHS, acting through the administrator of the Health Resources Services Administration (HRSA), to award grants to health-care facilities to develop and implement patient-navigator services to reduce barriers to care and to improve health outcomes. Facilities receiving the grants would be required to establish benchmarks and identify outcome criteria to measure the effectiveness of the program. Its companion bill in the Senate was
S. 898, introduced by Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison.
fte proposed legislation had broad, bipartisan support and passed both houses of Congress. On June 29, 2005, President George W. Bush signed the Patient Navigator, Outreach and Chronic Disease Prevention Act (Pub. L. No. 109-18, Section 340A) into law. Despite passage of enabling legislation in 2005, funding was not appropri- ated until 2008. In fiscal year (FY) 2008, $4.8 million was appropriated by HRSA to fund six, 2-year grants over FY 2008–2009 (USDHHS, HRSA, 2015, p. ii, Ex-
ecutive Summary).
   Studies attest to the importance of patient navigators in minority populations. Researchers at the City Uni- versity of New York and Mount Sinai School of Med- icine in New York City conducted a cohort study of



Hispanic patients referred from their primary care clin- ics for screening colonoscopies between November 2003 and May 2006. Of the 688 patients who were eligible to participate in the study, 532 had a female, bilingual, Hispanic patient navigator assigned to assist them with successfully completing the procedure. Of the navigated patients, 66% completed their screening colonoscopies. fte vast majority—95%—had adequate bowel prepara- tion; 16% were found to have adenomas. fte “no-show” rate for urban minority patients dropped from a high of 40% before implementation of the navigator program to a low of 9.8%. Most (98%) of the patients reported being satisfied with the navigator program, and 66% in- dicated that they probably, or definitely, would not have completed the procedure if the patient navigator pro- gram had not been in effect (Chen et al., 2008).
fte ACA reauthorized the PNDP through 2015,
and new 3-year grants were made in 2010. Unfortu- nately, funding was not appropriated for FY 2012, and the PNDP ended in August 2012 (USDHHS, HRSA, 2015, p. ii, Executive Summary). ftis is a good object lesson about competing demands in an environment of increasingly scarce resources. It is incumbent on APNs to translate their patient-advocacy role into political and legislative action. Public laws that are underfunded, such as the PNDP, cannot deliver on the legislative intent for which they were enacted.
   Even in the best of worlds, successful patient-navigator programs present a real conflict to their parent health- care institutions or plans. Implementation of a successful program requires a substantial investment in personnel and training. A successful program will produce mea- surable improvements in patient outcomes; for example, fewer patient visits to ED(s) for routine care, decreased incidence and severity of complications in patients with chronic disease processes, fewer hospital admissions. Al- though all these are highly desirable outcomes for pa- tients, these outcomes translate into significantly less reimbursement to health-care facilities and providers. From a business perspective, it makes no sense to imple- ment a program that will generate less revenue. A simi- lar situation is seen in managed care programs weighing the pros and cons of implementing or expanding health promotional programs. If a few managed care plans take the lead in offering such expanded programs, they run the real risk that the long-term benefits that accrue to the

programs through a reduction in the care costs of their enrollees will not be realized to the investing program if the enrollees subsequently switch to another managed care plan. fte managed care plans that exhibit a com- mitment to health promotion could end up bearing all the costs for implementing these programs and realize none of the benefits. Indeed, the benefits could flow to other managed care plans that had not made such an in- vestment in the health of their enrollees. Reimbursement needs to be redesigned to incentivize and reward deliv- ery systems that produce positive health outcomes and lower overall health-care costs. Medicare reimbursement has already adopted this approach through provisions in the ACA—the Hospital Readmissions Reduction Plan (HRRP), effective October 1, 2012 (CMS, 2020a). Hos- pitals that exceeded the national average for readmission rates within 30 days of discharge for patients treated for myocardial infarctions, congestive heart failure, or pneu- monia lost 1% of their Medicare payments in 2013. ftis increased to 2% in 2014 and 3% in 2015. In addition, patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and total hip and knee replacement were added to the patient conditions being tracked. In all, 3,129 hospitals had their condition-specific readmission rates tracked for FY 2019. Of these, 83% received a penalty, which was deducted from the Medicare reimbursement that they received for each Medicare patient stay over the next fis- cal year. fte average penalty is a reduction of 0.71% of the Medicare reimbursement for each Medicare patient who is discharged from the hospital. fte maximum 3% penalty was applied to 56 hospitals. A total of 372 hos- pitals were not assessed any penalties in 2019 or 2020 (Rau, 2019).

ASSESSMENT


fte first step in providing culturally competent care is assessment—of ourselves, of our patients’ needs, and of our existing organizational resources. Each of us brings the influence of our own cultural heritage, experiences, biases, beliefs, and expectations about patient–provider relationships to the care that we give. Evaluation of the effect of these influences on our caregiving practices is the first step to achieving cultural competence as a prac- titioner. fte National Center for Cultural Competence



(NCCC) offers an exceptional array of tools for assessing and building cultural competence in individuals and or- ganizations. fte NCCC’s home Web site (https://nccc
.georgetown.edu) offers a wealth of instructional materi- als as well as assessment tools, including distance learn- ing, resources, information on its Leadership Institute and Community of Practice, all just a click away.
   An excellent self-assessment tool is a 37-item check- list, Promoting Cultural and Linguistic Competency Self-Assessment Checklist for Personnel Providing Pri- mary Health Care Services, available from the NCCC. Its content is applicable to all advanced practice nurs- ing roles. fte individual responds to specific examples about values, attitudes, communication styles, the practice environment, and patient materials and re- sources. For example, Item 7 asks the practitioner to indicate the frequency with which he or she would do the following:
For individuals and families who speak languages or dialects other than English, I attempt to learn and use key words so that I am better able to communi- cate with them during assessment, treatment or other interventions.(https://nccc.georgetown.edu/documents
/Checklist%20PHC.pdf)
   Another self-assessment tool, the Cultural and Lin- guistic Competence Health Practitioner Assessment (CLCHPA), was made available on the NCCC Web site in the fall of 2016. It is a detailed self-assessment and educational activity tool that will significantly im- prove practitioners’ ability to deliver culturally and linguistically competent care to meet the health and mental health needs of patients and to take a leadership role in promoting cultural and linguistic competence in the community and in the health-care organizations in which they practice. Upon completion of the assess- ment, individuals receive a score relative to the norming sample, analysis of what the score represents (i.e., level of cultural and linguistic competence), and a list of educa- tional resources and professional development activities to facilitate continued growth in their knowledge and skill in the areas of cultural and linguistic competence as well as health and health-care disparities. fte assessment tool is unique in that it assesses the ability to communi- cate effectively with persons from diverse populations, including those with LEP, disabilities, and hearing

deficits. fte CLCHPA takes approximately 80 minutes to complete. It does not need to be completed in a single session. fte CLCHPA and Goode’s assessment tool were being updated in 2020, so expect to see new content.
   Why is linguistic competence so important? Language gives voice to cultural expression. Many cultures have rich oral traditions that transmit their stories, traditions, and beliefs from generation to generation. Language serves as the primary vehicle for most of our interper- sonal communication, from patients’ descriptions of their health-care needs to interprofessional collabora- tion. Linguistic competence is essential to the delivery of culturally competent health care. A fundamental tenet of advanced practice nursing is patient empowerment: patients as informed, full partners in decision making about their health care. Operationalizing this core be- lief clearly requires effective provider-patient communi- cation, a condition that does not exist when linguistic barriers are present. At the very least, lack of linguistic competence makes patient assessment and intervention difficult; at worst, patient safety may be fundamentally compromised.
fte process of self-assessment must be approached
with a willingness to confront and modify or discard those inaccurate and uninformed preconceived cultural beliefs and attitudes that detract from providing care. Many of our attitudes and beliefs are so ingrained that we may never scrutinize them in the course of our daily practice until, and if, we become aware of their negative effect on our care. Even then, long-held biases may limit our introspection. Ethnocentrism, or the belief in the relative superiority of one’s own cultural group, is a com- mon phenomenon. Often operating at an unconscious level, ethnocentrism can exert a powerful influence on our patient interactions and care practices.
Organizational assessment is likewise essential to
providing culturally competent care. fte NCCC has produced an excellent tool that details the process for conducting an organizational self-assessment (Goode et al., 2002). fte process, which stresses community involvement and a nonpunitive approach with an em- phasis on self-knowledge and growth, is available at the NCCC Web site listed previously. Knowledge of our individual and institutional strengths and weaknesses in the area of cultural competence is a prerequisite to taking corrective action.



LEARNING ACTIVITY: CASE STUDY
Read the following case study, then respond to the questions that follow it.
Mrs. W, a 43-year-old married Hispanic woman with three children, comes to the neighborhood health center complaining of tightness in her chest and difficulty in coughing up her secretions. Her usual bilingual care provider is unavailable, so she is seen by another practitioner who is not profi- cient in Spanish. Mrs. W’s records reveal that she was diagnosed with mild intermittent asthma, for which she has been prescribed albuterol to be used as necessary. Mrs. W reports that she has not filled her last prescription because of the cost.
Mrs. W’s physical examination is unremarkable except for a slight increase in respiratory rate and scattered expiratory wheezes. To save her the cost of prescription medication, the provider recom- mends that she purchase the over-the-counter product Robitussin and take it four times per day. Mrs. W is advised to return to the clinic if her symptoms do not improve. No written follow-up instructions are available in Spanish.

Four days later, Mrs. W comes to the clinic in acute distress. Because of her limited understand- ing of English, she has purchased Honey Cough by Robitussin. fte provider had not thought to explain, or to give her written instructions about, the difference between guaifenesin (the active in- gredient in plain Robitussin, which acts to liquefy pulmonary secretions and promote expectoration) and Honey Cough, which contains only dextro- methorphan, a potent cough suppressant. Instead of relieving Mrs. W’s symptoms, the provider’s lack of linguistically appropriate intervention sig- nificantly worsened her condition by depressing the very mechanism that would have allowed her to expel her secretions.
1. What additional steps could the provider have taken during the visit to increase the likelihood of Mrs. W purchasing the correct medication?
2. Describe organizational changes the provider could propose to prevent this situation from occurring in the future.
3. What, if any, are the provider’s potential legal liabilities in this case?



  Culturally competent patient assessment is indis- pensable to appropriate diagnosis and treatment and promotes patient participation in decision making about health and treatment regimens. An understand- ing of the beliefs and practices of a patient’s cultural group facilitates assessment, and respectful questioning wherein the patient becomes the teacher about their cul- ture produces data to support your clinical judgments and helps build trust between patient and provider. A particularly valuable resource for drawing out a patient’s beliefs about health and illness is a work by an early pioneer in culturally competent care, “Understanding, Eliciting and Negotiating Clients’ Multicultural Health Beliefs” (Jackson, 1993). Box 19.9 provides a list of questions helpful in understanding patients’ views on illness and treatment.
Note that all the questions in Box 19.9 are framed
from the perspective of the patient. ftey acknowledge the patient’s ownership of their unique illness experi- ence. Framing the questions in this way allows the APN



to enter into the patient’s lived experience. By exploring the patient’s perceptions and expectations, the provider is better able to propose a treatment plan that is compat- ible with the patient’s cultural beliefs and practices.
   Culturally competent assessment also requires that the clinician apply ethnically appropriate parameters when interpreting physical findings. Body mass index (BMI) is widely used as a tool to assess patients’ risk for diabetes and cardiovascular disease. In the first decade of the 21st century a growing body of evidence suggests that the European-derived, “one size fits all” BMI classifications for overweight (25 kg/m2 or greater but fewer than 30 kg/m2) and obese (equal to or greater than 30 kg/m2) were not appropriate across all ethnic groups. A seminal study (Razak et al., 2007) reported in Circulation sought to determine if the then current cut point for determining obesity that was used in clinical practice was appropriate for use in non-European populations. A random sample of 1,078 subjects was recruited from participants in the Study of Health Assessment and Risk in Ethnic Groups (SHARE) and Risk Evaluation in Aboriginal Peoples (SHARE-AP). Subjects from four ethnic groups (South Asians [n = 5,289], Chinese [n = 5,281], Aboriginals [n = 5,207], and Europeans [n = 5,301]) were evaluated for 14 variables, 2 clinical (systolic and diastolic blood pressure) and 12 biochemical (fasting and 2-hour glu- cose; fasting and 2-hour insulin; HbA1C; Homeostasis Model Assessment-insulin resistance [HOMA-IR]; high-density and low-density lipids [HDL and LDL, re- spectively] and triglycerides; fasting and 2-hour free fatty acids; and cardiometabolic markers). Factor analysis re- vealed three latent factors that accounted for 56% of the variation in the subjects’ cardiometabolic markers and blood pressure. fte main effect of ethnicity was highly significant for each factor (P = 0.001). Compared with European subjects for a given BMI, South Asian, Chi- nese, and Aboriginal subjects had elevated glucose and lipid metabolism-related factors. fte South Asian sub- jects had the worst glucose and lipid profiles, the highest 2-hour oral glucose tolerance test levels, the highest LDL levels, and the lowest HDL levels (Razak et al., 2007,
p. 2113). Elevated blood pressure–related factor was found in Chinese subjects at a BMI of 25.3 kg/m2 com- pared with a BMI of 30 kg/m2 in Europeans (p. 2114). In discussing their findings, the authors concluded the following (Razak et al., 2007, p. 2114):

Use of BMI cut points derived among Europeans understates the cardiometabolic risk associated with weight gain in other ethnic groups. fte pathway linking obesity to clinical events is mediated partially through its strong association with the development of diabetes, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. ftis sug- gests that to minimize the development of cardiomet- abolic risk factors, lower BMI targets should be used by health-care professionals in some non-European populations.

   Major sources of best practices, such as the Joslin Clinic, have already incorporated ethno-specific and gender-specific BMI recommendations in their clinical guidelines. fte Joslin Diabetes Center and Joslin Clinic Clinical Nutrition Guideline for Overweight and Obese Adults with Type 2 Diabetes, ftose with Prediabetes, or ftose at High Risk for Developing Type 2 Diabetes use BMI or waistline measurements to identify target popu- lations. Persons from Asian populations (South Asian In- dians, East Asians, and Malays) with a BMI greater than 23 kg/m2 and a waistline greater than 35 inches (90 cm) in men, or greater than 31 inches (80 cm) in women, are considered to be target individuals. ftis is in contrast to the guideline’s generic criteria of BMI greater than 25 kg/m2 or a waistline greater than 40 inches (102 cm) (men) and 35 inches (88 cm) (women) (Joslin Diabetes Center & Joslin Clinic, 2018, p. 1).
   Although the Joslin Clinic took the lead (2011) in applying ethno-specific guidelines for the identification of Asian persons at risk for type 2 diabetes, it was not until December 2014 that the American Diabetes As- sociation (ADA) announced that it was adopting the same BMI measures and was incorporating them into its 2015 Standards of Medical Care for Diabetes (ADA, 2014). fte BMI cut point for screening overweight or obese Asian Americans for prediabetes and type 2 dia- betes was changed to 23 kg/m2 to reflect the evidence that this population is at an increased risk for diabetes at lower BMI levels relative to the general population (ADA, 2014).
   Many of the national guidelines for clinical assess- ment of wellness and major health conditions affect- ing large segments of the U.S. population now reflect a cultural congruence not seen in previous guidelines, as in the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention



(CDC) growth charts released in 2000. Before the re- lease of the revised guidelines, clinicians had to rely on growth charts developed in 1977 by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), which were derived from data drawn primarily from 10,000 White, middle-class infants and children living in Ohio between 1929 and 1975. In contrast, the current CDC guidelines are based on survey data of children from diverse ethnic and ra- cial groups and incorporate data on breastfed children in proportion to the rate of breastfeeding in the general population. Fourteen percent of the data from which the current guidelines were developed represent informa- tion collected in surveys of African American children. ftis figure reflects the proportion of African American children living in the United States from 1971 to 1994 (New Growth Charts a Welcome Improvement, 2002). fte 2000 growth charts remain the standard for assess- ing the growth of a child and may be accessed at https:// www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/cdc_charts.htm.
Treatment regimens should always strive to incorpo-
rate the cultural practices and preferences that are most valued by the patient. For example, Muslim patients may observe strict dietary laws that include a prohi- bition against eating any pork products. Religion also dictates that Muslims fast from dawn to sunset during the observance of Ramadan. Ask your Muslim patients if they plan to observe a strict or a modified fast (Taheri & Jackson, 2018). fte scheduling of diagnostic testing and use of treatment plans that are congruent with patients’ valued cultural beliefs and practices are more likely to generate positive outcomes. Outcomes data are key de- terminants of reimbursement, provider recognition by third-party payers, and institutional accreditation. Cul- turally and linguistically competent patient assessment is the foundation of successful outcomes.

KNOWLEDGE

As an APN, you are well aware of the value of knowl- edge. Evidence-based practice is the standard to which you are held. Just as you are expected to incorporate the latest clinical guidelines for the management of con- ditions such as diabetes and lipid disorders into your practice, so, too, must you inform yourself about the be- liefs and practices of the cultural groups in your patient

population. ftis can seem like a daunting task, espe- cially if your patient population is quite diverse. fte task becomes even more complex if you have a rapid influx of immigrants from a cultural group new to the setting. Many sources of help are available to assist the individual practitioner and the organization to care effectively for diverse populations. Every cultural group has its com- munity leaders. Often, they are religious leaders and professionals who are more than willing to assist local health and social agencies in meeting the needs of their community. Many culturally affiliated church and social organizations have developed literature and other mate- rials to help noncommunity members better understand their cultural beliefs and practices.
All APNs are partners with their patients in providing
culturally competent care. Box 19.10 provides key ques- tions to ask about any cultural group your patients come from. However, it is essential to recognize that individual patients may or may not adhere to the norms of the cul- tural group(s) to which they belong. Here is a phrase that may help you to remember these key questions and be a better partner: Partners In Delivering Culturally Compe- tent, Research-based Care For Diverse Populations.
   fte Internet is an extremely valuable resource for gathering information on various cultural groups. fte culture-specific materials developed by the Patient and Family Education Services (PFES) (https://depts
.washington.edu/pfes/) of the University of Washing- ton Medical Center are invaluable to APNs practicing in culturally diverse settings. Culture Clues are brief, provider-friendly overviews of the dominant beliefs and practices of the major cultural groups cared for by the medical center staff (University of Washington, 2020). fte clues include essential information about the cul- tural group’s perception of illness, how medical deci- sions are typically made, how prognostic information should be handled, and cultural norms about touch and modesty, among others. Culture Clues have been developed for the care of Albanian, Chinese, Korean, Latinx, Russian, Somali, and Vietnamese patients as well as deaf and hard-of-hearing patients. End-of-life Culture Clues for the Latinx, Russian, and Vietnamese cultures have also been developed. ftey are available at https:// depts.washington.edu/pfes/CultureClues.htm. Each of the Culture Clues provides the reader with additional resources about the cultural group and health care.



Box 19.10Key Questions Used to Explore Cultural Groups: PIDCCRCFDP• Perceptions: How are health and illness defined?	• Care: What are the patient’s expectations for the
• Interpersonal behavior: Does the  cultural group	outcomes of health and illness care? What cultural have particular norms for interpersonal behavior	preferences and practices does the patient wish to regarding beliefs about touch, eye contact, per-	have incorporated into the plan of care? Is this the sonal space, modesty, sexuality, and so on?	patient’s first formal experience with receiving care
• Decision   making:   Who  makes  health-care	in a structured health-care setting? fte first experi- decisions?	ence of being cared for by an APN?
• Communication needs: Be particularly sensitive to • Family: What is the primary social unit—the in- how the patients wish to be addressed and how	dividual, the family, or the community? What and by whom health-care information is commu-	are the family and kinship structures and roles in nicated. (See Box 19.11.)	health care?
• Complementary medicine: What are the group’s • Death and dying: Explore the meaning of and ritu- folk medicine beliefs and practices to maintain	als associated with death and dying.
wellness and to treat illness or injury? Explore their	• Psychiatric/mental health: How are mental health use of complementary and alternative medicine.		issues perceived by the group?
• Religion/spirituality: To what extent does spiritual-		Here is a phrase that may help you to remember ity or religious belief affect health-care beliefs and these key questions and be a better partner: Partners practices (e.g., specific dietary practices, prayer rit- In Delivering Culturally Competent, Research-based uals, refusal of blood products)?	Care For Diverse Populations.


  fte PFES has also developed Language Cards, dif- ferentially designed for inpatient or outpatient use. fte cards contain words and phrases, as well as graphics, in non-English languages to facilitate effective patient- provider communication. fte inpatient language cards are available in 10 languages, and the outpatient cards are available in 9. Other PFES resources include an ex- tensive array of patient-education materials, available in multiple languages. fte patient-education materials are exceptionally culturally congruent; for example, the resource entitled Diabetes During Ramadan (WellShare International, 2020) educates the patient about healthy ways to fast during the month of Ramadan (https:// ethnomed.org/resource/diabetes-during-ramadan/).
fte University of Washington’s Health Sciences
Libraries also maintains a Web site called EthnoMed at https://www.ethnomed.org that is a treasure trove of information. fte culture-specific materials include comprehensive discussion of the barriers to health care.

fte Web site provides access to an extensive compen- dium of clinician support resources in the following areas:
• Cultures: ftere are cultural profiles on multiple cul- tural groups, including Hispanic/Latinx, Iraqi, and Chinese cultures.
• Clinical topics (including clinical pearls and case stud-
ies): fte topics range from commonly encountered disease conditions, such as asthma and diabetes, to modesty, sexuality, and breastfeeding in specific cul- tures, domestic violence, genetics, refugee health, and end-of-life care.
   Finally, honesty is the best policy. If you are unsure whether your approach to a patient is culturally appro- priate, acknowledge your unfamiliarity with the patient’s cultural norms and ask for guidance in how to best de- liver care. Most patients perceive this as being a thought- ful response to their right to respect and will be happy to



Box 19.11My Name Is Mr. RobertsMr. John Roberts, a widower, was a 68-year-old Black		Mr. Roberts’s son. His son revealed that Mr. Rob- man. Retired for 10 years, he lived independently		erts had always been fearful of being hospitalized or in his private home. His civilian and military pen-		taking anything other than oral medications after he sions allowed him to live comfortably and to meet		read about the Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis, his health-care costs. He was active in several church		begun in 1932 and continuing until 1972. fte 600 and community groups and expressed a high de-		study participants were all Black males, 299 of whom gree of satisfaction with his life. A heavy smoker for		had syphilis, none of whom gave informed consent. many years, he had recently agreed to enroll in a		fte men with syphilis were followed for the next smoking-cessation program in an effort to better con-		40 years to determine the natural course of untreated trol his hypertension. A chest x-ray performed during		syphilis. None of the men received penicillin, even a comprehensive physical examination revealed a		after it became known as the drug of choice for treat- large, previously undetected mass in his right lung.		ment in 1947. Mr. Roberts’s son also shared that his Further testing determined that the mass was malig-		father had preferentially sought out an African Amer- nant and that metastases had occurred. Mr. Roberts		ican as his primary care physician. fte hospitalist declined any treatment, saying that he wanted to live		asked Mr. Roberts’s son for help in allaying Mr. Rob- out his remaining life as fully as possible.		erts’s fears so that his analgesics could be administered When his condition deteriorated to the point at	by injection. His son helped to bridge the cultural which his comfort and safety were at risk, he agreed		gap, and his father experienced significantly  better
to enter a hospice home-care program. fte APN co-	pain relief.
ordinating Mr. Roberts’s care collaborated with him	Mr. Roberts died while hospitalized. He had been and his son in ensuring that all aspects of his physical brought up in a traditional home in which older per- and psychosocial needs were respected and met. Late sons were addressed by their last name by all except in the terminal phase of his illness, Mr. Roberts fell family members and close friends. Younger individu- and fractured his right hip, necessitating hospitaliza- als never presumed to call an older person by his or tion. In the hospital, he was frequently addressed by her first name. To do so would have been considered his first name, especially by younger staff members. disrespectful and rude.
Despite his repeated admonishment that his name			An accident denied the fulfillment of Mr. Rob- was Mr. Roberts, many of the staff persisted in calling		erts’s wish to die at home. However, the indignities him John.		that he experienced while hospitalized were totally fte small community hospital to which Mr. Rob-	preventable had his caregivers been more respectful of erts was admitted did not have pain-management		his communication needs and knowledgeable about specialists. fte attending hospitalist physician and		the potential for patients to mistrust medical recom- the nursing staff caring for Mr. Roberts were pre-		mendations based on their own personal experiences dominantly White and found him to be very resis-		of racism or knowledge of unethical medical practices
tant to switching from the oral analgesic medications	in the past.
that he had taken for pain while at home to intra-	A useful article for APNs is Benkert and col- muscular and/or IV administration of his analgesics. leagues’ “Trust, Mistrust, Racial Identity and Patient His primary nurse consulted with the clinical nurse Satisfaction in Urban African American Primary Care specialist for the unit and a meeting was set up with Patients of Nurse Practitioners” (2009).


help inform you. ftey may become your best teachers. It will enhance their trust in you and allow you to provide culturally appropriate care until you research additional information on the patient’s cultural group.

COMMUNICATION
AND PATIENT TEACHING

Communication is a critical element in the self- and institutional-assessment process. It encompasses provider- patient communication in all its forms from assessment to patient education, counseling, and documentation. How do you assess a patient or community whose pri- mary language is other than English? What technologies (e.g., Language Line Services) or interpreters are at your disposal to facilitate assessment, intervention, and teach- ing? What is your own level of proficiency in languages other than English? Linguistic competence is essential to quality patient care. With our multicultural patient pop- ulations, most of us are now, or soon will be, linguistically challenged. ftis becomes a practice issue only if we ig- nore the need and make no attempt to modify our prac- tice environment to meet the comprehensive needs of our patient base. Multiple texts and e-learning programs exist to develop basic foreign language skills.
Patient teaching raises major ethical issues regarding
equality of treatment. Whether the patient is an indi- vidual, family, or community, many patient-education materials are available primarily in English. A substan- tial number have also been translated into Spanish with fewer translated into other languages. For most other languages, the practitioner depends on interpreters or English-speaking family members to assist in the edu- cation process. fte availability of these supports may be limited, and as we know patients need supplemental materials to reinforce direct teaching, especially if the patient is anxious or the encounter is hurried. Cost- containment efforts focus on increased staff produc- tivity, which translates into more patients in less time. ftis, coupled with a linguistic barrier to teaching, is a recipe for poor outcomes. Collaborative decision making with your patients, a defining characteristic of advanced nursing practice, mandates the ability to communicate effectively. Advocacy begins in your own practice envi- ronment with your own patients. You have an ethical

and legal obligation to work toward ensuring equality in the treatment of all patients.
   Federal agencies such as the CDC, the CMS, the AHRQ, and the HRSA play a critical role in promoting health equity. fteir work guides the development of our country’s health-related legislation and regulations. ftey also produce multiple online resources that you can use for your own ongoing education regarding health literacy, for training health-care staff, and for developing culturally and linguistically appropriate patient education materials. An indispensable resource is the AHRQ’s second edi- tion of the Health Literacy Universal Precautions Toolkit (Brega et al., 2015). Citing statistics showing that 88% of the adults in America have health-literacy deficits that limit their ability to manage at least some aspect of their health or health care and that 36% have documented limited health literacy (Brega et al., 2015, p. 1), the tool- kit provides a wide array of guidance and resources to assess and improve the practice environment, patient– provider interactions, and patient-education materials in four key areas of primary care practice: spoken commu- nication, written communication, self-management and
empowerment, and supportive systems.
   fte CDC Web site (https://www.cdc.gov/health literacy/index.html) has multiple topical areas, including Learn About Health Literacy, which includes numeracy; Find Training; Plan and Act; Education and Community Support for Health Literacy, Develop Materials, and a Contact Form. You can subscribe for free e-mail updates of Health Literacy and the CDC-sponsored Bridging the Health Literacy Gap Blog. fte Develop & Test Materials (CDC, 2019) content area is a must for anyone develop- ing patient-education materials. fte Web site (https:// www.cdc.gov/healthliteracy/developmaterials/index
.html) provides information on the NIH’s Health Liter- acy Initiative; the Federal PLAIN Language Guidelines; a Health Literacy Online Guide that assists in develop- ing online health information that is user-friendly; the CLAS Standards; and access to the Toolkit for Making Written Material Clear and Effective (CMS, 2020d). fte toolkit contains essential tools for developing patient- education materials and for evaluating those currently in use in your practice setting. fte toolkit may be ac- cessed   at   https://www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-Education
/Outreach/WrittenMaterialsToolkit/index?redirect=
/WrittenMaterialsToolkit.



   One final critical resource from the CDC is “Older Adults,” available at https://www.cdc.gov/healthliteracy
/developmaterials/audiences/olderadults/index.html (CDC, 2020c). It contains information essential to cul- turally competent care of older patients, including ac- cess to such resources as the CDC’s Expert Panel Report on Improving Health Literacy for Older Adults, a self- assessment tool, and a variety of materials that evaluate the impact of the challenges to health literacy posed by the aging process, for example, age-related hearing and visual deficits.
  fte National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) Web site (https:// www.niddk.nih.gov) provides an extensive listing of patient-education materials that are available in Span- ish as well as English for urological diseases, kidney dis- eases, diabetes, digestive diseases, liver disease, weight control, and physical activity. Many may be downloaded and reproduced. fte Web site also has clinical practice tools and patient-education resources for health-care professionals.
   Many additional organizations are actively engaged in addressing health literacy. One of the most innovative resources now available to APNs is the Asian American Diabetes Initiative (AADI) sponsored by the Joslin Di- abetes Center. According to the Joslin Diabetes Center (2020b), 51% of Asian Americans who have diabetes are undiagnosed. fte AADI has developed a wide range of teaching-learning tools for use by patients and health- care professionals. fte tools range from clinical guide- lines and video clips to a Head Start: Parent Café, where parents can learn ways to help their children exercise, maintain a healthy weight, and minimize their risk of de- veloping diabetes. One in five Asian Americans develops diabetes. Materials developed by the AADI, including many free educational resources, may be found on the Internet at https://www.joslin.org/patient-care/multi- cultural-programs/asian-american-diabetes-initiative. fte information on the Web site is available in English, traditional Chinese, Simplified Chinese, and Japanese. Be sure to click on the Web site’s “Drag ’N Cook” to access an app (https://aadi.joslin.org/en/drag-n-cook) that provides digital guidance for the preparation of both delicious and healthy Asian (Chinese, Indian, Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese) meals. Nutrition facts for in- gredients commonly used in Asian cooking, such as soy

sauce or oyster sauce, canola oil, brown long grain rice, and carrots as well as the nutritional breakdown of reci- pes are prominently displayed. Drag ’N Cook even spon- sors recipe contests with the winners receiving prizes that encourage exercise, such as pedometers.

RESEARCH AS A CRITICAL
DETERMINANT OF PRACTICE


Do you or the institutions with which you are affiliated conduct evaluation research to determine whether you are accomplishing desired patient outcomes in your area of specialty practice? ftink of how valuable it would be to collect and analyze outcomes data, not only to com- pare the relative efficacy of the different types of practi- tioners but also to examine outcomes as a function of patient cultural groupings, primary languages spoken and read, and other factors. Outcomes data from eval- uation research are often the catalyst for bringing about organizational change.
   A recent example of a powerful piece of retrospective evaluation research is an article entitled “Culturally Tai- lored Group Medical Appointments for Diabetic Black Americans” by Newby and Gray, which was published in the Journal for Nurse Practitioners in May 2016. In the study, half of the 250 adult subjects (mean age 57 years) with type 2 diabetes received standard, 15-minute primary care appointments; the remaining 125 patients participated in single-session, shared medical appoint- ments (SMAs). fte SMAs, with 9 to 12 patients each, were held once a month for 120 minutes. Appointments were led by a collaborative, interdisciplinary team—a nurse practitioner (NP) who was a certified diabetic educator (CDE), a physician, and an additional CDE. fte SMA was structured so that each patient received a brief, individual examination and their own specific laboratory results to refer to during the 30- to 45-minute educational component that followed the examinations. fte participants were then split into two, 30-minute interactive group sessions, led by a CDE, which fo- cused on critical skills for diabetic self-care (e.g., glucose monitoring, reading and interpreting food labels, strat- egies for healthier food preparation). fte small group sessions also provided an opportunity for peer support and self-empowerment. As an added bonus, during the



educational component, the SMA members ate a dish that was frequently consumed in their community (e.g., sweet potato pie) that had been specially prepared to conform to the American Diabetes Association’s recom- mended nutritional standards. fte SMA participants had a “lived experience.” ftey got to see that they could still eat the foods that they loved to eat if they prepared them differently, which was a powerful motivator to make the necessary dietary modifications to control their diabetes. fte data were collected retrospectively over a 1-year period, comparing patients who had received a usual office visit or had participated in a single SMA. Within and between groups, pre- and postclinical mea- sures were assessed over a 3-month period. When the researchers compared (paired t-test) the HbA1C pre- and postclinical values of the SMA and usual office visit ap- pointment patients, the SMA patients showed a signifi- cant reduction in their HbA1C values (1.26%), whereas the usual office visit patients did not (0.05%) (Newby & Gray, 2016, pp. 317–323). ftis study is a very powerful example of how clinical research can have a significant impact on how care is delivered.

AMERICAN NURSES ASSOCIATION— ADVOCATE FOR CULTURALLY
CONGRUENT PRACTICE

Commitment to the provision of culturally competent care is an integral component of advanced practice nursing, as reflected in the ANA publication Nursing: Scope and Stan- dards of Practice, ftird Edition (2015b). fte document reemphasizes the client’s right to self-determination, pri- vacy, confidentiality, full and truthful disclosure, and care that is respectful and inclusive of the client’s cultural be- liefs and practices. Standard 8 specifically addresses “Cul- turally Congruent Practice,” and Appendix F provides a very valuable list of resources to promote the delivery of

culturally congruent professional nursing care. fte client advocacy role of the nurse is stressed, as is the importance of empowering the patient for effective clinical decision making and self-care (ANA, 2015b).

SUMMARY


fte defining characteristic that has led to widespread use of APNs across multiple care settings and has earned them unparalleled patient acceptance is their ability to truly partner with their patients to provide care that the patient perceives as being respectful and inclusive. A ma- jor component of that care is associated with culture: its values, beliefs, and attitudes toward caring.
  fte delivery of culturally congruent care is not op- tional but mandated by the ethical standards of our pro- fession as well as by legal and accreditation requirements. fte challenge for us as APNs and collectively as practi- tioners within a variety of health-care institutions is to consistently practice in a manner that is personally sensi- tive to our own biases and to be culturally astute. It is our responsibility to take active leadership roles within our professional organizations and the institutions in which we practice. Forging provider-patient partnerships that achieve positive health outcomes in diverse populations requires an investment of time and a commitment to continuity of care. Especially in the area of primary care, both of these critical elements of care are increas- ingly threatened with many practice settings moving to 15-minute appointments and with some abolishing providers’ panels of patients and having them “care” for the next patient in line. ftese practices may achieve cost savings in the short term, but they guarantee poor long- term patient outcomes and accelerated provider burn- out. A responsible business model balances patient needs and organizational resources to achieve equity and excel- lence of care in a fiscally sound manner.















Conflict Resolution in Advanced Practice Nursing
David M. Price




Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Recognize conflict as common and unavoidable in advanced practice nursing.
• Identify conflict management as an essential competency.
• Appreciate that conflict situations are of different types but have common fea- tures, challenges, and recommended responses.
• Describe some ineffective responses to conflict.
• Demonstrate effective responses to conflict and describe how they can be learned.
• Set clear, desirable, and achievable goals in anticipation of conflict.
• Defend the proposition that learning to deal with conflict is a career-long process.
• Describe resources available for learning effective conflict management, including ethical codes, social science literature, and mentoring by other professionals.
• Appreciate that the chief object of conflict management should always be service
to one’s patients, whether directly or indirectly.








359



INTRODUCTION

ftis chapter asserts the following claims, each of which builds logically on the previous one.
• All nurses encounter conflict.
• Advanced practice nurses (APNs) should expect to encounter even more conflict than other nurses do.
• APNs should realize that others will expect them to be
more proficient in the face of conflict.
• All nurses should develop effective ways to resolve conflict.
• APNs must commit to a career-long effort to develop
and demonstrate these skills.
• ftis skill set is an essential competency of advanced nursing roles.
ftis chapter will:
1. Defend the preceding assertions.
2. Illustrate the varieties of conflict situations com- mon in advanced practice nursing.
3. Examine dysfunctional responses to conflict all too common in nursing.
4. Identify ways to deal effectively with conflict.
   At the end, you will also find some recommended resources for continuing development of your conflict- management skills and some pearls of wisdom about this essential competency that the author has drawn from long clinical practice, from much observation and listen- ing, and from applicable literature.

DEFENSE OF BASIC ASSERTIONS

Conflict is common in all human endeavors. It is un- avoidable in complex social systems, such as families, voluntary associations, or health-care organizations. In any of these social systems, you should expect differences in personalities, role relationships, assumptions about what decisions belong to whom, and even styles of verbal expression. ftese differences make conflict not merely likely, but inevitable.
   Emotionally charged situations occurring within these social systems bring into the open disagreements, resentments, or mistrust that otherwise might remain under the surface. In the clinical realm, a sudden illness

or injury or an exacerbation of symptoms in a chronic illness can trigger open conflict because of heightened emotion. Such developments may alter the social roles of involved parties, even the APN, creating further confu- sions of expectation, shifting of responsibility, unfamiliar challenges, and, hence, increased anxiety on the part of some or all the parties. Anxiety arising from changing circumstances or unfamiliar challenges is very common in health care. It is frequently seen in patients and fam- ilies and occasionally even in experienced professionals (Rushton et al., 2016).
   APNs, as the very title suggests, have education and professional responsibilities that are more extensive and deeper than is typical of most registered nurses. Because we take it to be self-evident that all nurses encounter conflict in the ordinary conduct of their work, it follows that APNs will not only encounter more conflict but should also be expected to respond to conflict situations with more skill and effectiveness. APN roles often entail role modeling, mentoring, and teaching of nurses and, sometimes, other professionals. Because learning to deal effectively with conflict is a common concern for all health-care professionals, to the extent that role model- ing and teaching is part of an APN’s responsibility, they should regard advanced facility in conflict management as an essential competency (Kritek & Joel, 2013).

ILLUSTRATION OF COMMON CONFLICT SITUATIONS


fte following scenarios, all related to the care of a single patient, illustrate potential conflicts that may be encoun- tered by APNs. All three instances are set in a hospital, not because the author is unaware that APNs also work in long-term care, small clinics, private offices, and else- where, but because hospital settings are within the edu- cational, if not workplace, experience of all nurses. fte cases are further discussed later in the chapter.

Instance 1
You have arranged to meet with family members of your patient, an older woman in the medical intensive care unit (ICU). fte woman resides in a nursing home, and this is her third admission in recent months, all for the



same indication: shortness of breath caused by chronic heart failure. She is now resting quietly without apparent distress.
   fte consensus among her professional caregivers is that the goal of care from this point forward should be comfort, including either return to the nursing home with a care plan that includes a “Do Not Hospitalize” order and appropriate medications to treat dyspnea, or to the home of a family member on hospice.
   fte nursing home staff members have documented that the patient has not completed an advance direc- tive or otherwise expressed preferences about care at the end of life. Based on experience from this and previous admissions, you (and others on the team) expect that the principal family members accustomed to making decisions on behalf of the patient will resist the team’s recommendations.

Instance 2
A pulmonologist consulting on Instance 1, but not in- volved directly in team discussions about the discharge plan, corners you in the hallway. With obvious annoy- ance, he declares that you “have no business” initiating a family meeting about a treatment plan. You reply that you are recommending a treatment proposal represent- ing an interdisciplinary consensus. He counters, “ftat is a job for a physician!”

Instance 3
You have had a subsequent meeting with the pulmonol- ogist. In your opinion, this attempt to reach an under- standing has failed. You decide to alert the director of nursing. She tells you that this physician has made simi- lar complaints before and that she has “had some success in calming him down.” You leave her office thinking that you did the right thing by alerting her to the conflict with him.
   Later, when reminiscing about your visit to the direc- tor’s office, you feel disappointed. ftinking more about it, you conclude that the director’s response to you was inadequate. You decide that simply “calming him down” is not enough, either for you or for the professional staff as a whole. ftis physician is widely viewed as a disrup- tive presence on the med-surg floors. Apparently, the

medical staff leadership has long been aware of the prob- lem but has not taken effective action.
   You believe that trying to stimulate more effective action by the institution would be professionally respon- sible. You also remind yourself that doing so would be at least uncomfortable, if not risky, for you.
   ftese three instances illustrate three distinct kinds of conflict situations common in the experience of APNs.
• Instance 1: conflict with one’s own patients or their families
• Instance 2: conflict with another professional
• Instance 3: conflict with administrative leaders and/or institutional procedure
   Each of these types of conflict, though distinct, has much in common with the others, especially regarding the attitudes and habits with which parties to the con- flict approach it. All three reflect the “culture” of the institution.
   We all have noticed that our own family members, neighbors, and coworkers vary from individual to indi- vidual in how they tend to respond to conflict. Some of us have realized that we ourselves tend to respond to conflict differently depending on who else is involved or on the role relationship (i.e., whether we are sister or sister-in-law, social friend or institutional colleague, new friend or old friend).

DYSFUNCTIONAL RESPONSES TO CONFLICT


fte ftomas-Kilmann Index (TKI) identifies five dis- tinct kinds of responses to conflict: avoiding, accommo- dating, compromising, collaborating, and competing. ftis index has been used to study the relative frequency of preference for each mode of conflict management in various populations. In a classic study, Valentine (2001) analyzed eight studies that applied the TKI to nurses. Nurses in these studies predominantly used two conflict-management modes: avoiding and compromis- ing. fte third most frequently identified response was accommodation.
   fte significance of these data lies in the results that typically follow from each of these styles of conflict management. Conflict-management experts have found



that avoiding and accommodating (i.e., going along with or acquiescing) end up in disadvantaging one’s self. Compromising leads to all parties to the conflict being equally disadvantaged. Collaborating and competing are the only two response modes that lead to a robust gain for one’s own position. Because the previously cited data indicate that nurses tend to avoid conflict, go along with the other’s idea, or compromise, it appears that nurses generally respond to conflict with ineffective strategies, if ensuring gain for one’s self is the desired end.
   Getting one’s own way is not an ethically worthy goal in and of itself. Indeed, self-effacement of a certain kind is a professional virtue. Putting the patient’s welfare at the center of one’s concern is the enduring core of the Hippocratic Oath and all health professional oaths since. In the American Nurses Association’s Code of Ethics for Nurses with Interpretive Statements (2015), this first prin- ciple of professional obligation is most directly expressed in the preface: “fte nurse’s primary commitment is to the patient. . . .”
   However, this ethical promise to always put the pa- tient first does not mean that nurses should simply ac- cept the ideas of their patients. On the contrary, if the APN believes that their own point of view or proposal may lead to a better outcome for the patient or family in question, fidelity to the patient-first principle would re- quire the APN to advocate for their own position. Stated differently, rather than being seen as respect for patient autonomy, merely going along with a patient’s (or surro- gate’s) perspective in such instances should be interpreted as a failure of the professional obligation to put the pa- tient’s welfare first.
Furthermore, when members of a group typically
behave in certain ways, others may form unfortunate expectations. To the extent that nurses characteristi- cally avoid and accommodate, other parties to decision making are conditioned not to look to them for input. Nurses have relevant knowledge, training, and profes- sional perspectives that can lead to better outcomes for those we all are pledged to serve. Wherever members of a social system do not expect nurse input, the result is that nurses are further disadvantaged. More importantly, so are patients and their loved ones. Conversely, when nurses adopt more assertive responses to conflict, they not only enhance their status, but they also more effec- tively serve their patients.
  
Finally, nurses can become discouraged and frus- trated after habitually practicing avoidance and accom- modation. Chronic discouragement and frustration after many experiences of failing to adequately cope with perceived wrong leads to moral distress (Rushton et al., 2016) and to compassion fatigue, sometimes called “pro- fessional burnout.” Compassion fatigue is a form of spir- itual withdrawal that has devastating consequences, both on nurses who succumb and on the human resources of institutions. If we again push the ethical analysis of compassion fatigue to what is ultimately at stake, we see that it is of professional concern, not primarily because of its effect on us, but because it robs our patients of the full measure of our healing presence.

EFFECTIVE WAYS TO DEAL WITH CONFLICT


When encountering any conflict situation, one should pause to identify, review, and clarify one’s own goals. What do I want to happen here? Is my preferred out- come really desirable? Is it achievable? Does it accord with professional ideals? What are my motives? How does it affect my relationships with those I am pledged to protect and serve?
   Efforts to effectively manage conflict should be in service to goals that are both clear and professionally de- fensible. ftoughtful clinicians know that much avoid- able suffering and waste of resources is caused by medical interventions that have little chance of working, let alone furthering the patient’s goals. fte same is true of conflict strategies. Indeed, much conflict arises in the first place because the parties to it are either unclear about their goals or pursuing goals that are unrealistic or otherwise unworthy.
   Let us consider Instance 1. You are about to meet with family members of a decisionally incapacitated patient with no advance directive. fte patient was admitted to the ICU for shortness of breath but is now stable enough to leave. ftis is her third admission in recent months. fte consensus view of the treatment team is that optimal care is hospice care. fte family is expected to resist this recom- mendation. What is your goal for this meeting?
   Surely, to answer that the goal is “to find out what the family wants to do” is not acceptable. Such an answer



totally ignores the ethical obligation to present the best judgment of the treatment team. ftat is not primarily an obligation to your team; it is an obligation to your patient and to her surrogates. It is also an obligation that arises out of your professional role as an APN.
   If your first answer is that your goal is “to get consent for admission to hospice care,” you may want to recon- sider. ftat goal may not be achievable, and it is ethi- cally suspect. It violates professional principles in that it does not sufficiently respect the patient’s right to self- determination as expressed through her surrogates. It may also short-change the meaning of “informed con- sent.” Informed consent is not mere assent to a profes- sional proposal; rather, it is a process of dialogue leading to a joint decision.
   A better formulation of goals would be “to negoti- ate a mutually agreeable plan of care.” Note the words mutually agreeable. ftis formulation of the goal leaves plenty of room for advocacy of the team’s consensus view and for you to push back against unrealistic or otherwise inappropriate ideas while still acknowledging that the patient and surrogate(s) must agree to the goals of care.
   Now that you are clear about your goal for this prob- ably difficult family meeting, you would be well advised to review how one might best approach this task. David Weissman, MD, an emeritus professor in the Palliative Care Program at the Medical College of Wisconsin, and his successors have trained thousands of health profes- sionals to conduct family meetings focused on treatment decisions for patients at or near the end of life. He calls these meetings “family goal setting conferences” and de- scribes 10 steps that should be taken when conducting these meetings.
  fte first and longest of Dr. Weissman’s 10 steps is headed “Preparation”; the second step is “Establish proper setting” (Weissman, 2016). ftus, he reminds us that, just as we would prepare in advance for a surgical operation, there are very important steps that must hap- pen before starting the intervention itself.
   Dr. Weissman proposes that the person conducting such meetings state their goal for the meeting and ask others present if they have any other goals. He insists that this happen immediately after everyone states their names and relationship to the patient. Again, we are re- minded of the primacy of thoughtfully formulated and clearly articulated goals in any enterprise and especially

in ones that may involve emotional difficulty or conflict. As part of his “Goals/Relationship” step, Dr. Weissman proposes that the person conducting the meeting ask a “nonmedical” question such as “Can you tell me some- thing about your mother?” fte purpose is to build a re- lationship with the family before tackling the hard and potentially contentious main agenda. ftis advice is en- tirely in accord with the counsel of conflict-management experts (Kritek & Joel, 2013).
   Weissman’s next step is “Understanding of Condi- tion.” fte logic of treatment planning requires this step near the outset because instituting interventions with- out taking account of the patient’s condition is a lead- ing cause of avoidable suffering and waste of resources, especially in the older persons and other patients with factors that inhibit recovery. Effective and efficient com- munication also commends Weissman’s suggestion that one should ask all the family members to respond. Ask- ing, rather than telling, furthers relationships by eliciting what they think as well as providing additional evidence of what misperceptions are in play, what divisions may exist, and who might be an ally in moving the family to- ward a plan most consistent with the advice of the staff. fte remaining steps in David Weissman’s guide to Family Goal Setting Conferences may be found in the invaluable, comprehensive online resource Fast Facts (2015), which is available as a smartphone app and is a useful tool to have instantly accessible (https://www
.pcnow.org/fast-facts). An open-minded and  thoughtful
reading of Weissman’s compact summary of advice for conducting a family meeting, while thinking about the theme of conflict management, should make it readily apparent that, if you master this set of skills, you are probably prepared to deal with all manner of conflict situations likely to arise in clinical settings.
   Instance 2 shifts attention from conflict with pa- tients or families to conflict involving another profes- sional. fte particular circumstances in Instance 2 pit you in conflict with a physician upset upon learning that an APN is convening and conducting a family con- ference focused on treatment decisions. ftis physician confronts you in a hospital hallway. With “obvious an- noyance,” he states that you “have no business” discuss- ing therapeutic plans with a patient’s family. He brushes aside your explanation that you will be recommending a treatment proposal that represents the consensus of the



interdisciplinary treatment team, declaring, “ftat is a job for a physician!”
   ftough this conflict situation is distinct from that in Instance 1, some recommendations from that discussion are fundamentally applicable. First, preparation is essential for effective conflict management. You should have all rel- evant and available information well in hand and be clear about your goals. You should, in David Weissman’s terms, “Check your own emotions.” Second, you should prepare the setting. A hallway is surely not anyone’s well-reasoned choice of setting for effectively dealing with this situation. ftese considerations alone are sufficient reason to post- pone further exchange to another time and another place. You could simply turn away and leave the scene. It could be argued that the arrogance and disrespect dis- played by the physician “deserves” no more. However, it would be naïve for an APN to be totally unprepared for the possibility of encountering such attitudes and opin- ions. Furthermore, it seems to the author of this chapter that returning disrespect for disrespect is both unprofes- sional and very likely to be totally counterproductive. In sober consideration, an APN’s optimal goal in this situ- ation would not be well served by an abrupt withdrawal
with or without an insulting retort.
   Accordingly, I recommend that APNs have ready some stock responses for conflict situations of this kind that arise without warning or in circumstances that do not favor effective attempts at resolution. One such re- sponse might be, “Dr. X, we clearly need to pursue this matter at a better time and place. I will be in touch.” Such a response has several features that commend it:
• In the terms of previously discussed concepts, it is nei- ther avoidance nor accommodation.
• It is respectful in that you are not outright dismissing
his perspective or his right to have one.
• It accepts neither the correctness of his position nor that he will have the last word.
• It acknowledges that the issue remains in play and
that you expect to engage further.
• By taking responsibility for initiating further discus- sion, you gain influence over when, where, and how to attempt resolution—or at least more understand- ing and respectful disagreement.
• ftis is consummately professional behavior. Even if
he does not perceive it that way, others will.
  
Assume that you were practiced enough to respond to Dr. X’s ambush approximately as recommended pre- viously. You are now in a position to plan your next move. First, your professional stature, as well as optimal management of this conflict, requires that you follow through within a timely period. Second, you need to be clear about your goal for the meeting, that is, clear about what you hope to accomplish. Your goals should be both professionally desirable and achievable. Here, it may be helpful to seek some consultation. Consulting peers may be preferable to seeking advice from administrators whose counsel may be geared more to their conception of institutional interests than to your clinical and colle- gial objectives. You might decide to do both.
fte items that Weissman envisions as appropriate for
planning a family meeting are similar to the checklist for preparation of this nonclinical encounter. “Review- ing relevant information” in the context of Instance 1 meant making sure that you had a firm grip on prog- nosis, treatment course, and options for clinical care. In this instance, the relevant information would include the professional, legal, and institutional stipulations about the scope of advanced practice nursing roles. Deciding who you want to be present at the meeting is similarly important and, similarly, might require input from col- leagues. Finally, checking your own emotions is especially critical in Instance 2 because your own professional le- gitimacy is the very subject of the conflict. An adequate plan for the meeting ought to include some provision for a follow-up with other players in case an initial one-on- one with the physician proves inadequate. As much as you prepare for success, you must be realistic.
Finally, even though your efforts to address this con-
flict in a face-to-face meeting with this particular physi- cian may not meet your goals, it is nonetheless important that you make your very best effort. fte professional lit- erature has long addressed the duty to report bad behav- ior of other professionals (American Medical Association [AMA], 2016). Some of this literature is filed under the heading “Whistleblowing,” particularly when addressing situations in which first-line superiors do not take effec- tive action. Common advice in this literature is to not report until you have attempted to resolve the situation directly. fte fact that a well-executed effort has already been made, without success, is generally thought to be a stronger inducement for action by higher authorities.



   fterefore, even if you doubt the efficacy of the meet- ing you are preparing to have, you should proceed with it. ftis advice may seem to be at odds with previous discussion about how goals should be achievable. fte apparent inconsistency dissolves if you also recall the suggestion about formulating your goal for this antici- pated meeting to include the possibility of a follow-up step. ftat way, your goal would not be unachievable, no matter the extent of your pessimism about the suffi- ciency of the initial meeting.
   Instance 3 illustrates a distinctly different arena of conflict. Here, the conflict—or anticipated conflict—is with administrative leaders or institutional procedures. fte conflict in Instance 1 was “anticipated” in the sense that it emerged unavoidably in the course of ordinary clinical work. fte conflict in Instance 2, thrust upon you by surprise by an angry coworker, was clearly un- anticipated, except in the sense that you should have imagined that such a thing might happen sometime. Differentiated from either of the other cases, Instance 3 is a conflict situation that you will precipitate—if, indeed, you choose to do so.
Should you? (“Should” questions are ethical ques-
tions.) ftis is not an easy one. On the one hand, the ethical principle is clear enough: The Code of Ethics for Nurses devotes a whole section (Provision 6) to the nurse’s responsibility to maintain and improve the ethi- cal environment of work settings. “Respect and trust” is a fair characterization of the professional virtue violated by the physician in Instance 2. “Respect and Trust” also leads the list of virtues in the Code essential to the kind of flourishing moral milieu that nurses are charged to promote. Lest this language seem too vague, the Code includes a subsection (6.3) stating that the nurse “partic- ipate(s) in interprofessional workplace advocacy to ad- dress unethical practice.” So, yes: you have a professional responsibility to protect the hospital from the threat posed by this physician’s attitude and behavior.
However, clear statements of professional responsibil-
ity do not, by themselves, dictate specific answers to con- crete actions. Indeed, the immediately preceding section of the Code speaks to an equally important duty to care for one’s self, including both one’s safety and health and one’s professional integrity. So, moral choices are not al- ways easy, and citing only one obligation is rarely sufficient (and often a feature of craftily misleading arguments).
  
Facts also count. So does context. Because good ethi- cal choices depend on good information, action without knowledge is reckless and thereby unethical. Instance 3 includes some general information that begs for fact checking and development of further understanding:
• Dr. X is “widely regarded as a disruptive presence.” How widely? Only by nurses or by others as well?
• He has complained before. Only to the director of
nursing or also to others? What others?
• fte medical staff leadership has “apparently” been aware of his disruptive behavior. Is this true? If so, for how long? Has he ever been sanctioned by the medical staff or by any other oversight body? If so, for what?
• How long has he been on the staff? Is he active in staff
affairs? Does he, or has he recently, served on import- ant hospital committees? Is he well known to nonphy- sician hospital administrators?
• Is he an employee of the hospital or in private prac-
tice? If in private practice, is it a group practice? Does he have a history of moving around?
• How long have you been at this hospital? How long in
your APN role? Are you well established (i.e., secure in your present position)?
• Who do you regard as your mentors? Who are your
champions on the nursing staff? Who are your physi- cian champions?
• Have you initiated complaints or undertaken institu-
tional advocacy before this? Here or elsewhere? How did that go? What did you learn from that experience?
   All these are potentially relevant questions. Answers may prompt additional questions. How complete the answers to each should be is unknowable at the outset. Developing the information will remain an open pro- cess until you decide that you are sufficiently prepared to proceed.
   Note that the previous paragraph ends with a pre- sumption that you will proceed. Not doing anything seems beyond the range of ethical options, given the ci- tations from the Code of Ethics for Nurses. A decision to proceed may also be mandated by a more general under- standing of what it means to be a professional in a 21st century health-care institution. However, how you ought to proceed, when you ought to move decisively, and with whom you ought to take action all properly depend on information not yet in evidence.



   Again, it is ethically relevant that this conflict situ- ation is one in which the APN has time on their side. ftose who have the luxury of moving deliberately but who fail to deliberate may be courageous, but they are also foolish. Courage is a virtue explicitly cited in the part of the Code of Ethics for Nurses that deals with this matter; wisdom and patience are also cited in the very same section (4.2). An APN who excels in only one vir- tue to the detriment of others should not be regarded as a good role model.
   Similarly, an experienced, well-established APN who does exemplary work with patients but always keeps their head down in the face of suboptimal workplace conditions is not an exemplar of the profession. Indeed, any nurse, and especially an APN, who fails to act out of undue concern for their personal well-being may be justifiably charged with “unprofessional behavior.” In support of such a charge, one could surely cite the Code of Ethics for Nurses and, probably, the legislation in most states that describes the roles and obligations of nurse licensees. Indeed, this obligation to act responsibly to prevent the immoral, illegal, or incompetent acts of co- workers is common among all health-care professions in the United States and Canada.
Most of us hesitate to directly confront peers, let
alone file formal complaints against them. fte reasons we give for our failure to call out bad behavior are many:
• “ftere but for the grace of God go I.”
• “We have to work alongside these people.”
• “I doubt that he would listen to me.”
• “Why should I when her own practice partners don’t do anything?”
• “I’m not good at confrontation.”
• “Maybe it won’t happen again.”
   We all know at some level that none of these reasons adequately justify a failure to act. Almost none of us could offer such excuses without a measure of shame. Yet letting in that uncomfortable truth rarely changes behavior.
   ftese observations are based on more than two de- cades of experience leading intensive workshops with health-care professionals of all kinds, from all over the United States and Canada, who are sent by licensing boards and other oversight agencies (the PROBE Pro- gram). Both role-playing and candid discussions in these sessions convincingly demonstrate just how hard it is for

most experienced health professionals to directly con- front each other about perceived bad behavior. Despite scores of these seminars, the faculty does not claim that such remedial education has actually helped the approx- imately 3,000 participants to overcome their avoidance and accommodation. On the other hand, seminar par- ticipants do often demonstrate heightened appreciation for the ethical mandate that professionals should protect the public from bad behavior of other health profession- als (Caldecott & d’Oronzio, 2014). We cling to the con- viction that few of us want to act irresponsibly once we are helped to appreciate what our responsibility entails.
Returning to the particulars of Instance 3, if you
decide to proceed after considering all available infor- mation, several general procedural guidelines will help ensure success:
• Remind yourself repeatedly that your goal is not ret- ribution against someone who treated you poorly, but reduction of behavior toxic to the culture of an insti- tution committed to healing.
• Keep it factual. A complaint based on objective facts
is far more persuasive than one based on subjective opinion. Describe what happened rather than how you felt about it or how you interpret it. Make it about the institutional culture and ultimately about patients.
• Prepare and present a written record of times and
places. Include the experience of others, so long as it involves directly observed behavior and not hearsay or opinions based on secondhand information.
• If institutional officials ask you about what other
nurses have reported or about the attitudes of nurses generally, be prepared to answer in terms of what you have heard directly. Avoid “impressions” and general- izations. Again, keep it factual.
• If institutional officials explicitly ask you questions
about your evaluation of the offending physician’s be- havior, about why you think such behavior is a threat to the hospital, or about what institutional response would satisfy you, be prepared to answer in terms that are brief, clear, and professional.
• Remember your goal: to reduce the incidence of be-
havior toxic to the institutional culture and thus its mission.
• If asked (and only if asked), propose solutions that are
rehabilitative rather than punitive. Make it about the



integrity and effectiveness of the hospital, not about you (and not about nurses vs. physicians).
• Follow up any meetings with institutional officials
with an e-mail or memo summarizing what happened at the meeting and what you understand to be the process going forward. Include the date of the meet- ing and names of those present. Include relevant tar- get dates and the names and tasks of those who took on roles for next steps. Be sure to include yourself if you were asked to do anything further.
• Prepare this memo and all other written materials
with care. Keep a dispassionate, professional tone. Edit out emotionally charged adjectives. Avoid any suggestion that you have any interests beyond those stated in your goal.
• Understand that, even as you felt hesitant to take this
on, institutional leaders may be tempted to avoid con- flict as well. Although your follow-up memo is a non- threatening way to remind them of responsibilities that they might rather forget, avoid any suggestion that you expect anything other than an efficient and effective process.

RESOURCES FOR CAREER-LONG LEARNING

It should be clear by this point that, like so many other aspects of an APN’s knowledge base and skills, manag- ing conflict will entail career-long learning. Fortunately, a large and growing array of publications and training resources is readily available to anyone with rudimentary Internet search capability.
   Such a search will soon demonstrate that most such resources arise from or are aimed at the business com- munity. Even the listings specific to nursing tend to skew toward administration and human resources rather than the clinical focus of this chapter. APNs with clin- ical roles or responsibilities that include first-line over- sight of clinicians can learn much from such literature and training. However, most APNs working directly with patients and families will need to navigate past the majority of administration-related resources to locate those most directly addressed to explicitly clinical cir- cumstances and roles.
My further guidance for such searches is to also look
elsewhere than the “conflict management” literature.

Much general wisdom and explicit behavioral advice can be found by searching in categories of clinical specialties, that is, pediatric nursing, maternal health, geriatrics, and so on. For example, one can readily find the Fast Facts resource by navigating the palliative care literature in search of subtopics like “decision-making” or “treatment planning.”
   Finally, do not overlook potential resources in the literature and continuing education offerings of sister health-care professions such as social work and medicine. Indeed, this author’s observations suggest that some of the most stubborn conflicts in clinical settings are being addressed in interdisciplinary forums, often with APNs playing crucial roles, both of initiation and facilitation. To discover and find value in resources drawn from the literature of others is a proven way of building interdis- ciplinary collaboration. Interdisciplinary collaboration is something APNs both need and seem especially well positioned to nurture.

SUMMARY


fte observations and recommendations offered here are intended to address situations that most of us find extremely challenging. Indeed, the level of discomfort entailed in facing situations like that posed previously in Instance 1 is one main reason so many ineffective and even unwanted medical procedures are provided. Avoidance or mishandling of the situation illustrated in Instance 2 further disrupts professional collaboration and robs patients of optimal care. Anxiety about conflict and inadequate skill to effectively deal with it is why the ethical duty to report bad behavior of colleagues is a duty so often breached—in all the professions.
ftese observations and the specific, concrete sugges-
tions offered here should help to reduce the anxiety of APNs to more manageable levels. Practice and mutual support will increase confidence over time. Carefully se- lected continuing education in the essential capacity of conflict management can embolden APNs to act in ways once avoided as just too scary.
  ftat said, lowered anxiety in the face of conflict, al- though in itself a good thing, is not what motivated the inclusion of this chapter in this book. fte ultimate goal of this chapter, and of this book, is to help APNs to more fully realize their potential in this high calling.















Leadership for APNs
If Not Now, When?
Edna Cadmus




Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Understand how health-care reform has created both barriers and opportunities for advanced practice nurses (APNs).
• Distinguish between leadership frameworks and theories and their application to
advanced practice nursing.
• Understand what is meant by applying emotional, social, and cognitive intelligence.
• Illustrate the use of power, authority, and influence.
• Demonstrate the creation of change through the lens of complexity science and chaos theory.
• Use disruptive innovation as a means of reforming health care.
• Distinguish between APNs as entrepreneurs or intrapreneurs.
• Explain the use of networking and mentoring to advance one’s career.








368



INTRODUCTION

During the last 15 years, an infrastructure for radical change of the health-care system in the United States has been created. fte Institute of Medicine (IOM) reports To Err Is Human (IOM, 2000) and The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health (IOM, 2011) were prominent in prompting these changes. fte later report has also provided nurses, more specifically advanced practice nurses (APNs), with a blueprint to be part of that change. fte report addresses adjusting APNs’ roles and functions to ensure access, quality, and value at a reduced cost. fte blueprint is further advanced through the Campaign for Action sponsored by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF) in collaboration with AARP (formerly the American Association of Retired Persons). fteir campaign vision is to ensure that “all Americans have access to high-quality, patient-centered care in a health-care system where nurses contribute as essential partners in achieving success” (Center to Champion Nursing in America, 2011). fte Campaign for Action provides support to the Action Coalitions at the state level. ftese Action Coalitions are charged with implementing the recommendations described in the IOM Future of Nursing report. To learn more about these initiatives, visit https://campaignforaction.org/.
Since the initial report was released in 2011, the Na-
tional Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine (NAM) (2016), at the behest of the RWJF, conducted an assessment of the progress made toward the eight rec- ommendations. In the initial report, Recommendation 7 was “to prepare and enable nurses to lead change to ad- vance health.” fte skills needed to accomplish this rec- ommendation focused on leadership, entrepreneurship, and management. A follow-up report 5 years later re- vealed that although several programs had incorporated courses in leadership, entrepreneurship, and manage- ment, it would be necessary to track the courses in these areas to assess leadership development and determine progress (NAM, 2016).
fte Campaign for Action has transitioned from ex-
clusively building capacity in the nursing workforce to- ward building a culture of health. fterefore, improving health in communities is a key priority. ftis shift under- scores the urgency for APNs to lead change and advance health beyond hospital walls, working to the top of their

licensure. In 2019, the National Academy of Medicine formed an interprofessional committee supported by the RWJF. fte key objectives of the committee are to iden- tify best evidence and models to provide a direction for nursing from 2020 to 2030, focusing on the following elements:
• fte role of nurses in improving the health of individ- uals, families, and communities by addressing social determinants of health and providing effective, effi- cient, equitable, and accessible care for all across the care continuum, as well as identifying the system facil- itators and barriers to achieving this goal.
• fte current and future deployment of all levels of
nurses across the care continuum, including in collab- orative practice models, to address the challenges of building a culture of health.
• System facilitators and barriers to achieving a work-
force that is diverse, including gender, race, and eth- nicity, across all levels of nursing education.
• fte role of the nursing profession in assuring that the
voices of individuals, families and communities are incorporated into design and operations of clinical and community health systems.
• fte training and competency-development needed to
prepare nurses, including advanced practice nurses, to work outside of acute care settings and to lead efforts to build a culture of health and health equity, and the extent to which current curriculum meets these needs.
• fte ability of nurses to serve as change agents in creat-
ing systems that bridge the delivery of health care and social needs care in the community.
• fte research needed to identify or develop effective
nursing practices for eliminating gaps and disparities in health care.
• fte importance of nurse well-being and resilience in
ensuring the delivery of high-quality care and improv- ing community health.
(https://nam.edu/publications/the-future-of-nursing-2020-2030/)
   ftese objectives call to action APNs across the con- tinuum of care from the acute setting to the community. ftey also present an opportunity for APNs to focus on identifying gaps in health care and to lead.
   For example, the New Jersey Collaborating Center for Nursing (NJCCN) identified a gap in primary care access in 13 of the 21 counties in New Jersey. Box 21.1





     Barriers to Health-Care Access
Decreased access to affordable primary care will be created by the following factors:
1. An aging population with increased demand for primary care.
2. ftat demand will not be met by the current physician workforce, which is also aging. As the physician retirement rate increases, the gap between primary care provision and consumer needs will increase further.
3. Continued barriers to APN practice will pre- vent them from providing primary care and closing the gap.
4. Increased cost of APN contracts may dissuade current APNs from providing primary care, even in the limited context in which they are currently able to practice.
5. Potential out-migration of APNs to less-restrictive border states may harm the existing nursing workforce by decreasing the supply of APNs working in NJ.
6. fte number of counties that lack a minimally sufficient number of primary care provid- ers will rise, which may increase county-wide health care costs due to increased hospitaliza- tions and readmission rates.
7. Healthcare outcomes may decline statewide as affordable primary care is denied to all of New Jersey, especially, the most vulnerable populations.New Jersey Collaborating Center for Nursing. (2019). Policy analysis: Improving access to care for NJ (p. 6). Reprinted with permission.

lists some of the barriers identified by the NJCCN. ftis gap is especially evident in those counties with low in- come and poor health factors and health outcomes (NJCCN, 2019). APNs could fill these gaps; however, barriers to practice, such as the requirement of a collab- orative agreement, continue to be an issue. During the recent COVID-19 pandemic, these barriers were elimi- nated on an emergency basis to improve access to care in many states. Once the crisis is over, former regulations

will be restored. ftis change, although brief, provides evidence that barriers to practice should be removed per- manently. APNs must act on this momentum to elimi- nate a barrier that affects their future practice.
  During the Obama administration, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA), contributed to an uncertain health-care environ- ment but one that held promise for APNs. ftese legis- lative actions provided the technological and financial framework for resource allocation in an evolving health- care delivery system. ARRA defined meaningful-use regulations for informational technology. In 2016, the regulations required hospitals, physicians’ offices, and critical access hospitals to focus on advancing the use of the electronic health record (EHR) to support health information exchanges, interoperability, and ad- vanced quality measures (CMS, 2016). fte focus of the meaningful-use standards was to track a patient’s clinical conditions for better coordination across settings and to provide clinical decision support for providers. fte anticipated outcomes were improved quality and safety related to information being provided in a more efficient and effective manner (Burchill, 2010).
Much of the focus changed during the Trump ad-
ministration. fte charge to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) was to identify a revised strategy for health care that focused on three areas:
(1) empowering patients, (2) unleashing innovation, and (3) focusing on results with the patient at the cen- ter. A detailed diagram can be found in Figure 21.1. Accomplishments for 2019 can be found under each of these areas at  https://www.cms.gov/files/document
/2019-eoy-accomplishments-fact-sheet.pdf.
  fte ACA established the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovations to ensure coordinated care across the health-care continuum through delivery models that predict improved outcomes for patients. ftese care-delivery models span the spectrum from preventive care to end-of-life care opportunities. APNs have the opportunity to develop and implement evidence-based models of care and to reframe traditional definitions of health and health care. fte center seeks out innovative ideas and determines how they can be tested. Although not all of these programs are directly applicable to APNs, it is important for APNs to understand these programs


































Figure 21.1 CMS Strategic Initiatives. (https://www.cms.gov/About-CMS/Story-Page/Wheel-Graphic-Messaging-Architecture.pdf)


and how they impact practice. Examples of projects cur- rently underway are listed in Box 21.2 (CMS, 2019a–f). So, what does leadership mean for the APN? We know that APNs have a responsibility to lead health-care re- form that improves access, quality, and value-based care. ftis chapter explores leadership frameworks and theories that have evolved over time and apply them to the APN role. Further, the chapter describes leadership competencies and characteristics and identifies ways that
APNs can lead in complex and uncertain times.

EVOLUTION OF LEADERSHIP
FRAMEWORKS AND THEORIES


fte ongoing changes in the health-care landscape are influenced most by globalization, economic and tech- nological factors, and the aging of the population. fte complexity of the health-care environment requires us to examine the leadership theories that are applicable both to today and to the future. Leadership is often oversim- plified into one theory or framework, but the reality is



Box 21.2Some Current Projects of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovations1. Primary Care Transformation: ftese payment3. Medicare	Intravenous	Immune	Globulinmodel options, available under direct con-(IVIG) Demonstration: Under this demon-tracting, aim to reduce expenditures whilestration, Medicare will provide a bundled pay-preserving or enhancing quality of care for ben-ment under Part B for items and services thateficiaries. fte intent is to align financial incen-are necessary to administer IVIG in the hometives, provide a prospectively determined andto enrolled beneficiaries who are not otherwisepredictable revenue stream for participants, andhomebound and receiving home health careplace a greater emphasis on beneficiary choice.benefits (https://innovation.cms.gov/innovationftis model includes risk sharing arrangement in-models/ivig).Medicare Fee-For-Service; broadening partici-4. Part D Payment Modernization Model: ftispation in CMS Innovation Center models, em-model is designed to test the impact of a revisedpowering beneficiaries through potential benefitPart D program design and incentive alignmentenhancements, and reducing provider burdenon overall Part D prescription drug spendingthrough a smaller number of measures (https://and beneficiary out-of-pocket costs. fte modelinnovation.cms.gov/innovation-models/directaims to reduce Medicare expenditures while pre--contracting-model-options/).serving or enhancing quality of care for benefi-2. Medicare Advantage Value-Based Insuranceciaries. fte model is open to eligible standaloneDesign (VBID) Model: CMS is testing a broadPrescription Drug Plans (PDPs) and Medicarearray of complementary Medicare AdvantageAdvantage-Prescription Drug Plans (MA-PDs)(MA) health plan innovations designed to re-that are approved to participate (https://duce Medicare program expenditures; enhanceinnovation.cms.gov/innovation-models/part-dthe quality of care for Medicare beneficiaries,-payment-modernization-model).including those with low incomes such as5. Part D Senior Savings Model: Part D sponsorsdual-eligible; and improve the coordinationparticipating in this model will offer beneficiariesand efficiency of health-care service delivery.plan choices that provide broad access to multi-Overall, the VBID Model contributes to theple types of insulin. As a result, beneficiaries whomodernization of MA and tests whether thesetake insulin and enroll in a plan participating inmodels improve health outcomes and lowerthe model should save an average of $446 inexpenditures for MA enrollees. ftis modelannual out-of-pocket costs on insulin, or overis targeted to beneficiaries based on chronic66%, relative to their average cost-sharing today.condition and/or socioeconomic status. Caseftis predictable copay will provide improvedmanagement and disease management are oneaccess to and affordability of insulin in order toof the underpinnings of this model (https://improve management of beneficiaries who re-innovation.cms.gov/innovation-models/vbid/).quire insulin as part of their care.https://innovation.cms.gov/innovation-models/part-d-savings-model.



that each situation and how the leader interprets the en- vironment determines the leadership framework that is needed and the process to be employed. To better under- stand these theories and how they apply to the APN, it is important to appreciate how they have evolved over time.
  
ftere have been many definitions of leadership. Lead- ership has been described as a person or group, a process, or an outcome, depending on the theory utilized. Lead- ership has moved from leader-centered, or focusing on an individual, to an orientation of mutual power and



influence that results in collaboration and innovation. In the industrial age, leadership was more about control and structure, and people were treated as things. Leader- ship in the postindustrial age requires a different skill set from both the designated leader and every follower, who is expected to possess some leadership qualities. Today’s leaders must embrace new ways of being and interacting for success.
   In the knowledge-worker age, Covey (2007) de- scribes the “whole person paradigm,” in which the leader taps into each person and maximizes an individual’s contributions to create results. Early motivational theo- ries, such as McGregor’s X and Y theories, postulate that employees are motivated by leaders and that the leader can manipulate factors to motivate behaviors within an organization. As leadership theories evolved over time, motivation was seen as being inspired in the individual through effective communication and a shared vision from the leader. Followers want to meet challenges and are committed to meeting the goals of the organization. In the whole person paradigm, people are engaged in a four-dimensional way, tapping into their mind, body, spirit, and heart. Covey (2007) further describes the four imperatives of great leaders: (1) inspiring trust, (2) clarifying purpose, (3) unleashing talent, and (4) align- ing systems. In many situations, a leader who lacks any one of these imperatives prevents the organization from moving forward with the speed and efficiency to remain competitive. ftese imperatives can be applied by the APN in working with patients and other professionals as well. As the different frameworks and theories of leader- ship are described next, you will see that many of these imperatives appear over and over with different names.

Situational or Contingency Leadership
Situational leadership has been evolving since 1967, starting with the works of Vroom and Yetton (1973) and followed by Hersey and colleagues (2007) and Fielder (2012). Contingency or situational theories are based on the premise that different styles of leadership are needed in different circumstances. In all these models, the most effective style is contingent on the maturity and competence of the subordinates and the situation that is presented to the leader. For example, Hersey and colleagues’ model identifies four combinations that can occur in leadership style based on the situation or level

of employee or group that the leader is interacting with. Maturity in this model means competence, which is sig- nified by the knowledge, skills, and commitment of the participants (Blanchard, 2008). fte activities of lead- ership can include (a) “telling” when there is very low maturity, (b) “selling” to those with moderate maturity,
(c) “participating” for those with moderately high maturity, and (d) “delegation” for those with very high maturity (ftompson & Vecchio, 2009). Leadership style depends on the difficulty of the task and the maturity of the persons responsible for carrying out the task.

Servant-Leadership
In the early 1970s, Robert Greenleaf defined servant- leadership as a leader who wants to serve first versus being the leader first (Greenleaf Center for Servant Leadership, 2010). Servant-leaders focus on meeting the needs of oth- ers and accomplishing the work. In this model, anyone can be a servant-leader by meeting the needs of others.
  fte definition of servant-leadership has evolved over time. Nathan and associates (2019) define servant leadership as “an other-oriented approach to leadership manifested through one-on-one prioritizing of follower individual needs and interests, and outward reorient- ing of their concern for self towards concern for oth- ers within the organization and the larger community.” Van Dierendonck (2011) identified six characteristics of servant-leadership: (1) humility, (2) authenticity, (3) interpersonal acceptance, (4) empowering and develop- ing others, (5) providing direction, and (6) stewardship. ftese characteristics align well with APNs.
Sipe and Frick further developed the work of
Greenleaf by defining the seven pillars on which servant-leadership will grow and flourish: (1) personal character, (2) an ethic of people first, (3) skilled com- municator, (4) compassionate collaborator, (5) possess- ing foresight, (6) systems thinker, and (7) a leader with moral authority (2009). ftese seven pillars translate into specific competencies that define servant-leadership: being visionary, being a good listener, recognizing that there is a higher purpose other than oneself, respecting others, and holding oneself and others accountable for actions that affect the organization as a whole. Although all these competencies are not expected to be fully met by the leader, a large proportion must be part of the per- sona of the servant-leader.



   Some of the advantages of this model are that it introduces the concept of caring into leadership and creates a nurturing environment for followers and, ul- timately, the patient or client. Some of the disadvan- tages are that it is often confused with transformational leadership and is also seen as a weak form of leadership because of the connotation of the word servant. Ser- vant evokes the historical religious heritage of nursing, where the nurse was called to serve, and, therefore, to- day may seem outmoded. Servant-leadership is not the leader being a servant but rather serving as the leader. Servant-leadership has similarities to transformational leadership that include leaders as visionaries, trusted role models, and influence followers. fte main differ- ence is that transformational leaders’ focus is achieving organizational goals, whereas servant-leaders are focused on others within the organization and the community (Peters & Roodbol, 2020).

Transformational and Transactional Leadership
Transformational leadership has received considerable attention again recently. Burns (1978) initially defined and contrasted transactional leadership and transforma- tional leadership. He connected leadership with the need for purpose. Transactional leaders work with their fol- lowers to gain some type of exchange for services that are contracted by the leader. Transformational leaders, on the other hand, look for the motives of their followers and engage the full person in reaching a mutual purpose. Burns (1978) identified a strong link with morality and ethics in the transformational model, placing emphasis on the wants and needs of the followers as opposed to the leader or the situation at hand. Bass (1985) further defined transformational leaders as being able to elevate the interests of their followers and to look beyond their own self-interest to that of the group. Transformational leaders are described as being charismatic and able to bring out the best in their followers. ftey tend to exude competence and confidence. ftey are inspirational, con- siderate of their followers, and intellectually stimulating (Bass, 1985; Bass & Riggio, 2008). ftis type of leader- ship is most effective in turbulent markets.
Bass further defined transactional leadership as work-
ing on the promise of reward or the fear of penalties by

the followers. ftis type of leadership is more effective in a stable marketplace. Burns saw transformational leader- ship and transactional leadership as opposites. fterefore, leaders were either transformational or transactional but not both. Bass, on the other hand, stated that leaders use both transformational and transactional behaviors based on the situation and even within the same situation.
   Using transformational leadership as a springboard, Kouzes and Posner (2017) developed five practices and 10 commitments of leadership behaviors. ftey defined leadership not by title, power, or authority but by rela- tionships, credibility, and what we do. fte relationship is between the person who aspires to lead and those who choose to follow. Credibility includes being hon- est, competent, and inspiring and is the foundation of leadership. Credibility is established by doing what you say you will do. Kouzes and Posner’s work differs from that of Bass because they put an emphasis on behaviors. fteir five principles of leadership are (1) modeling the way, (2) inspiring a shared vision, (3) challenging the process, (4) enabling others to act, and (5) encouraging the heart (Kouzes & Posner, 2017). In each of these prin- ciples, there are valuable lessons that the APN can apply in practice.
“Modeling the way” involves finding your voice and
articulating your values. Based on these values, you can generate common principles and ideals with others. Modeling also involves setting an example by using ac- tions to speak louder than words. “Inspiring a shared vision” involves considering what could be, engaging others in creating that future state, and maintaining en- thusiasm that helps in keeping others engaged. Engaging others through shared dreams is key to successful change. “Challenging the process” requires leaders to challenge the status quo and take risks by experimenting with new ways of doing things. Leaders learn from their successes and their failures and continue to adapt to new ways of operating. “Enabling others to act” requires the leader to recognize the importance of the team and to trust its members to act. Building trust and collaboration with others helps to make them successful. Followers con- sider such leaders authentic. In “encouraging the heart,” leaders provide support and encouragement through the change process and recognize the contributions of their team. ftey celebrate the team’s successes regularly (Kouzes & Posner, 2017).



Relational Leadership
Uhl-Bien (2006) and Rost (1995) describe relational leadership theory as occurring in any direction and re- flecting a mutual agenda between follower and leader. Relational leadership requires inclusion of others and their viewpoints and the ability to persuade others to your way of thinking. Luthans and Avolio’s (2003) au- thentic leadership, which has been adopted by nursing and health care in general, is based on relational lead- ership theory. It builds upon the concept of building healthy work environments that are supported by pos- itive staff and patient outcomes (Alilyyani et al., 2018). ftese models of leadership focus on the team as a pro- cess, and the team works collectively for the common good of the organization. Leadership is not a single role. In this model, teams also evolve their own culture. In these models, each individual brings his or her leader- ship skill set to the table, and the collective learning and abilities enable an adaptation to complexity. An example of this type of leadership can be found in virtual team leadership in which the primary work is conducted using electronic media modalities. ftis model can be used by APNs as they frequently work in interprofessional teams where they may need to use their expertise in dealing with patient care needs or practice changes.

Clinical Leadership and Congruent Leadership
fteories described in the management literature may not completely translate to clinical practice. Congruent leadership may be a more appropriate theory for the cli- nician. Stanley (2008) defines congruent leadership theory as “matching the clinical leaders’ actions and their val- ues and beliefs about care and nursing . . . the theoreti- cal foundation on which clinical nurses can build their capacity to be clinical leaders” (p. 519). fte concepts embedded in transformational leadership—namely, vi- sion and creativity—may not be appropriate to explain clinical leadership; however, the other characteristics remain (Stanley, 2008). Hamric and colleagues (2014) further describe clinical leadership as focusing on the patient first and on building working relationships to problem solve as part of an interprofessional team. Stan- ley (2006a) identifies the key characteristics of clinical

leaders as being approachable and open; having strong values and beliefs that are displayed in their practice; being effective communicators, role models, and de- cision makers; and being visible and clinically compe- tent. Clinical leaders do not exhibit the creativity and vision described in transformational leadership (Stanley, 2006b). Clinical leaders are not commonly in manage- ment positions.

Aesthetic Leadership
Dinh and associates (2014) proposed the concept of aesthetic leadership to meet the gaps in both transfor- mational leadership and congruent leadership. Aesthetic leaders focus on the art of nursing and differentiate be- tween the novice and the expert clinical nurse defined by Benner (Mannix et al., 2015). fte aesthetic leader exam- ines views gained through sensory awareness and knowl- edge as it relates to the leader and the leader-follower dyad (Dinh et al., 2014).
   In reviewing these leadership models, it is clear that one leadership style does not fit all leaders and all sit- uations. APNs need to understand these leadership styles to be able to choose the styles most appropriate to their personalities and to the different leadership situa- tions they encounter in their practices. Leadership styles evolve over time and should be developed throughout your career.

REFRAMING LEADERSHIP THROUGH MENTAL MODELS


Leaders need mental models to make sense of the volatile- uncertain-complex-ambiguous (VUCA) environments in which they find themselves (Bolman & Deal, 2017). One type of mental model is the frame. A frame is a composite of beliefs and assumptions used to navigate the world. ftese frames are filters for problem-solving and getting things done in organizations. Leaders typi- cally make use of four frames: (1) structural, (2) human resource, (3) political, and (4) symbolic. Leaders of to- day and the future need to be able to use all four frames based on the situation with which they are presented. Leaders also need to be able to reframe until they under- stand the situation.



   fte structural frame focuses on the organization’s cir- cumstances, goals, rules, technology, and environment. It addresses how the organizational chart is structured and how work is distributed in the organization. In times of uncertainty, relationships are usually hierar- chical. ftis makes sense because organizations focus on structure when trying to reestablish stability (Bolman & Deal, 2017). For example, as health care is redesigned, the system needs to focus on the needs of the population in the community, building from the bottom up, from the smallest to the largest unit of service. Organizations such as hospitals will shrink over time, and other models of care and mental models will be substituted, creating new relationships.
One of the structures or models used in today’s
health-care system is the Accountable Care Organiza- tion (ACO), which was formed to address the triple aim of quality, lower cost, and improved population health. fte emphasis of this model is on primary and preven- tive care, requiring health-care providers to rethink care delivery. ACOs have had mixed outcomes. Most organi- zations are now focused on creating highly reliable orga- nizations with limited variability in their performance for extended periods through a structured approach (Vogus & Singer, 2016). fte focus in this model is on the population served, which means crossing boundar- ies across the care continuum. ftis makes coordination of care more difficult. ftis is an area where APNs can provide their leadership both in care coordination and in managing a wide variety of quality metrics that must be satisfied. Many of these ACOs also require risk shar- ing, which raises the stakes even higher. APNs can as- sess where the organization is most vulnerable across the continuum and look at areas such as readmission rates and referral patterns, stratifying the populations served. ftey can then identify where the weaknesses are and ask the hard questions of what should be done differently. Although structure has been the main focus in devel- oping ACOs, the frontline professionals are key to the success of these organizations. Concepts of teamwork, care coordination, and interprofessional collaboration are important areas where APNs can lead.
fte human resource frame focuses on the alignment
between human and organizational needs. In troubled economic times, leaders may feel torn between in- vesting in their people or creating a “lean and mean”

organization. Organizations that engage employees in meaningful work are the organizations that are most suc- cessful. How engagement is demonstrated varies based on the organization and the situations. Relationships are key to being flexible and nimble and are the key to orga- nizational effectiveness (Bolman & Deal, 2017).
  fte political frame redefines organizations as coa- litions in which individuals and groups are competing for scarce resources. Exercising power and influence to negotiate resources is a key skill set for individuals and groups. Being effective politically requires leaders to set an agenda, scan the environment, develop networking skills, and negotiate with those who support their agenda as well as create relationships with those who do not (Bolman & Deal, 2017). ftis is an area where APNs need to become more engaged, developing negotiation skills and building relationships with those in the polit- ical arena. For example, in more than half of the states, APNs have limitations on their practice at varying levels. Political capital is essential to remove the barriers to full practice in order to improve access to care and health outcomes.
fte symbolic frame refers to how meaning is per-
ceived by the individual or group. Symbols create that perception and include rituals, values, stories, and myths that are evidenced in our culture. Symbols are created in times of uncertainty and ambiguity to try to make sense of reality and to create a more rational world. Are symbols important? Consider that organizations are fre- quently measured by appearance as well as by outcomes (Bolman & Deal, 2017).

Application of Leadership Theories for Advanced Practice Nurses
APNs are leaders both formally and informally in the practice setting. In the clinical setting, they may serve as either the leader or the follower, depending on the situ- ation. No matter the theory of leadership applied, good APN leaders share key characteristics including strong values, clear purpose, bringing out the best in others, strong interprofessional relationships, mutual power and influence, and clinical competence.
   fte APN uses evidence to support practice, ensures that quality indicators are met, works with the team collaboratively, and cares for the patient and the family.



APNs engaged in care redesign can positively impact cost, quality, and access through new models of care delivery (Broome & Marshall, 2021). fte APN can be the leader, as in the primary care model in which he or she manages a practice of patients, or be a member of a team led by another. In either situation, the APN focuses on the pa- tient and family to ensure that their needs are met and advocates for them as required to achieve high-quality outcomes. Using their leadership skills, APNs can fill the gaps in care and create new models of care delivery that are valued by the consumer at a lower cost.

OTHER ASPECTS OF LEADERSHIP

Emotional, Social, and Cognitive Intelligence
Good leaders have intelligence. Emotional, social, and cognitive intelligence provide the framework for per- sonality. Emotional intelligence refers to how we manage ourselves; social intelligence, to how we manage our rela- tionships; and cognitive intelligence, to how we think or analyze information that leads to superior performance (Boyatzis, 2011). fte emotional, social, and cognitive intelligence competencies are integrated to measure out- standing performance in leaders.
   fte emotional intelligence competencies focus on self and include self-awareness and self-management.

 		Self-awareness requires the leader to be honest with self

Leadership Competencies
Heinen and colleagues (2019) conducted an integrative review of leadership competencies and attributes. fte inclusion criteria were for the period of January 2005 to December 2018. Locations reviewed for this study included Europe, North America, and Australia with most of the articles coming from North America and Australia. Fifteen studies and seven competency frame- works were included. For 8 of the 15 studies, quality could not be determined. Synthesis of the identified competencies yielded 30 core competencies for lead- ership in the domains of clinical, professional, health systems, and health policy. ftese core leadership compe- tencies and examples are described next.
fte clinical leadership domain includes knowledge
of and skills in integrating evidence-based practice and leading care coordination across the continuum. Profes- sional leadership includes engagement in professional or- ganizations and peer review activities. fte health system domain includes moving to a strategic level by leading interprofessional teams and organization/system-wide committees. ftis competency requires executive leaders to value the role and contributions that APNs can make to an organization’s strategic plan. It also requires APNs having the skill set needed to lead. Finally, the policy domain of leadership requires the knowledge and skills needed to engage in the political arena as well as the skills needed to negotiate change using big data. All four do- mains are important for APNs to develop to be effective leaders in the health-care arena.

and others about personal strengths and weaknesses. fte leader is reflective and clear on values and goals and acts with authenticity. Self-management requires lead- ers to control their emotions. Leaders who demonstrate self-management are seen as optimistic, enthusiastic, transparent, and adaptable. ftey are perceived as posi- tive leaders (Goleman et al., 2013).
   Emotional intelligence (EI) is important in support- ing the interprofessional teamwork, communication, and leadership expected of APNs. Cox (2018) cross-walked APN competencies with the EI competencies. For lead- ership, the EI competencies include empathy, emotional self-control, organizational awareness, change catalyst, influencer, inspirational leader, self-confidence, and optimism. For communication, the EI competencies include building bonds, conflict management, transpar- ency, influence, and achievement. For teamwork, the EI competencies include adaptability, developing others, teamwork, and collaboration. ftese EI competencies take the APN competencies expected upon graduation and actualize them for new APNs.
fte social intelligence competencies are focused on
how we manage relationships and include social aware- ness and relationship management. Social awareness re- quires the leader to be empathetic, a good listener, and attuned to the needs of others. Relationship manage- ment requires the leader to have a tool set that includes conflict management and collaboration skills. fte leader is able to find common ground in various situations. fte leader is inspirational with an ability to influence and de- velop others on the team. fte socially intelligent leader



is seen as a change catalyst and can create effective teams (Goleman et al., 2013).
   Social intelligence is “a set of interpersonal compe- tencies built on specific neural circuits in the brain and [endocrine system] that inspire others to be effective” (Goleman & Boyatzis, 2008, p. 76). ftese circuits in- clude mirror neurons, which mimic others’ behaviors; spindle cells, which provide a “gut reaction” to a situ- ation or person; and oscillators, which coordinate our physical movements with those of others (Goleman & Boyatzis, 2008; Veronesi, 2009). Socially intelligent leaders are tuned in to others so that they can commu- nicate effectively.
   Can social intelligence be learned? fte brain can be reprogrammed to learn how to become more socially intelligent through strategies that change behaviors. ftis requires the individual to be motivated to make the change in behaviors, to obtain feedback from others on one’s strengths and weaknesses using tools such as a 360-degree assessment, and to set a learning agreement between oneself and a mentor. ftis calls for intense work on the part of the leader and a socially intelligent men- tor. If a leader is mentored by someone who is strong and socially intelligent and who is able to provide immediate feedback on a consistent basis, the neural circuits can be changed (Veronesi, 2009).
Cognitive intelligence provides the leader with the
ability to see patterns emerging and to use systems think- ing to understand the patterns (Boyatzis, 2011). ftis is important for leaders in a time of uncertainty and chaos. Leaders need to be able to analyze information and re- spond to the patterns or changes occurring, specifically in health care. fte emotional, social, and cognitive com- petencies are integrated, can all be learned, and are im- portant for leaders to assess their own performance and the performance of others.

Power, Authority, and Influence
Good leaders are able to get things done. Power can be exerted through persuasion, influence, or control. Bol-

they control the resources. ftis is an old-world view of power. fte human resource theorist views power as com- ing from empowerment of others. ftis view fits more appropriately in today’s world.
   Although it is often viewed negatively, power can be either negative or positive, depending on how it is used. Leaders need power to build relationships and get re- sults. Power can come from one’s position, persona, rep- utation, or expertise; or it can come from being coercive of others or controlling of information or other re- sources. Collective leadership distributes power based on capability, expertise, and motivation. Power is shared in this model (Eckert et al., 2014). For the APN, sharing one’s expertise helps to create a collective leadership en- vironment rather than a hierarchical one.
   Leadership and authority are not necessarily the same thing. Leaders cannot lead without legitimacy from their followers. Legitimate authority is a product of influence and acceptance by a group of people. More important than hierarchical authority is the ability to influence others through motivation, persuasion, and negotiation (Jooste, 2004).
   Leaders motivate or influence others to follow by creating a shared vision and purpose and by providing the environment where change can happen. Alignment of values and purpose is essential to success. ftis is not an optional step in the leadership sequence; leaders need followers, and vice versa. Both the leader and the fol- lower depend on each other for success, yet each has dif- ferent talents and skills. Although much has been said about leadership, it is just as important to describe key components of being a “good follower.” ftese compo- nents include (a) clear role comprehension, (b) service attributes for self and others, (c) integrity, and (d) sup- port for the leader. It is key that the follower be engaged in the organization. fte leader needs to create an envi- ronment where there is both trust and respect so that the follower can flourish.


ENVIRONMENT

man and Deal (2017) compare power from the perspec-	 	

tive of structural and human resource theorists. ftrough the structural theorist’s lens, power comes from author- ity. fte leader decides the course of action, issues a direc- tive, and then monitors whether the followers carry out the directive. In this view, leaders have power because

Complexity Science and Chaos Theory
Complexity science and chaos theory allow us to ex- amine leadership and organizations in the 21st century. ftese approaches focus on leadership as a process, not a



person. To explore these ideas in relationship to leader- ship, a brief introduction to complexity science, complex adaptive systems (CAS), and chaos theory is needed.
   Complexity science is derived from quantum phys- ics, chaos theory, and systems theory. Complexity sci- ence looks at relationships between and among all things and defines the nature of the relationship by its actions and impact (Porter O’Grady et al., 2018). A CAS is defined as “a collection of individual agents who have the freedom to act in ways that are not always predict- able, and whose actions are interconnected such that one agent’s actions change the context for other agents” (Plsek, 2003, p. 2). A CAS has the ability to adapt to change. Plsek (2003) identifies the following properties of a CAS: (a) relationships as central to understand- ing the system (i.e., the way in which the system be- haves comes from the interactions of the individuals);
(b) structures, processes, and patterns; (c) actions based
on internalized simple rules and mental models (i.e., the individual’s mental model contributes to the patterns in the environment); (d) attractor patterns (i.e., those that help facilitate a change are close to the individu- al’s values); (e) constant adaptation; (f ) experimentation and pruning (i.e., support for new ways of doing things and eliminating those that no longer work); (g) inherent nonlinearity (i.e., there is no predictable cause and effect; the shortest distance between two points is not always a straight line); and (h) systems are embedded within other systems and co-evolve (i.e., formal and informal leadership can advance simultaneously and often in dif- ferent directions).
Modern health-care systems are almost by definition
CAS (Crowell, 2016). A healthy CAS is one that is al- ways ready to change because if it is not, it cannot sur- vive (Lindberg et al., 2008). Chaos is a key component of change and, in fact, a necessary catalyst for change. Change is constant; therefore, we need to create spaces for new interactions, structures, and patterns that will be formed (Lindberg et al., 2008).
   Wheatley and Frieze (2010) urge us to let go of the traditional paradigm of leadership. According to that paradigm, leaders always have the answers and know what to do; people do what they’re told and just have to be given good plans and instructions; high risk re- quires high control; and as situations grow more com- plex and challenging, power needs to shift to the top (with the leaders, who know what to do). If we want

complex systems to work better, we need to abandon our reliance on the leader-as-hero and invite in the leader- as-host. We need to support leaders who know that problems are complex and who know that to understand the full complexity of any issue, all parts of the system need to be invited to participate and contribute. We, as followers, need to give our leaders time, patience, and forgiveness; and we need to be willing to step up and contribute. ftese leaders-as-hosts are candid enough to admit when they don’t know what to do; they realize that it’s foolish to rely only on them for answers. But they also know they can trust in other people’s creativity and com- mitment to get the work done. ftey know that other people, no matter where they are in the organizational hierarchy, can be as motivated, diligent, and creative as the leader, given the right invitation.
Wheatley (2007) brings together chaos theory and
complexity theory with leadership. She believes that leaders traditionally focused on transactional functions and that nowadays complex organizations require decen- tralizing, differentiation of tasks, spanning boundaries, collaboration, flexibility, adaptability of structures and processes, participation, and autonomy. Leaders-as-hosts don’t just benevolently let go and trust that people will do good work. As hosts, leaders have a great many things to attend to, but these tasks are quite different from the work of heroes. fte tasks of a hosting leader are listed in Box 21.3.
   fte Wheatley model is based on four core principles, which drive change for the host-leader (Wheatley, 2007):

1. Participation is not a choice; in other words, “peo- ple only support what they create” (p. 89).
2. Life always reacts to directives, it never obeys them; therefore, “people accept partners not bosses” (p. 90).
3. We do not see reality; we each create our own inter- pretation of what reality is.
4. To create better health in a living system, connect it to more of itself; therefore, leaders need to in- crease the number and variety of connections. An underpinning of Wheatley’s principles is therefore engagement. fte leader needs to encourage engage- ment and create an environment where there is con- versation that fleshes out different perspectives and increases the connections by changing or expanding those needing to be involved.





     Tasks of the Leader-as-Host
• Provide conditions and good group processes for people to work together.
• Provide the resource of time, the scarcest com-
modity of all.
• Insist that people and the system learn from experience.
• Offer unequivocal support—people know the
leader is there for them.
• Keep the bureaucracy at bay, creating oases (or bunkers) where people are less encumbered by senseless administrative trivia.
• Play defense with other leaders who want to
take back control and who are critical that peo- ple have been given too much freedom.
• Reflect back to people on a regular basis how
they’re doing, what they’re accomplishing, and how far they’ve journeyed.
• Work with people to develop relevant measures
of progress to make their achievements visible.
• Value conviviality and esprit de corps—not false “rah-rah” activities but the spirit that arises in any group that accomplishes difficult work together.Wheatley, M., & Frieze, D. (2010). Leadership in the age of complexity: From hero to host. Retrieved from http://www.margaretwheatley.com
/articles/Leadership-in-Age-of -Complexity.pdf

Change in a Complex World
Understanding complexity science and chaos theory can help leaders effect change. Porter O’Grady and col- leagues (2018) describe change as a dynamic journey that is everywhere and cannot be avoided but that needs to be embraced by leaders. fte leaders’ responsibility is to help translate the change for their followers and to role model a comfort level with the ambiguity generated from uncertainty. fte leader is the change agent, or cata- lyst for change, in an organization and is under constant observation by followers, evaluating how well (or not) he or she adapts to the change. If the leader does not adapt well to change, the followers will not either.
Creating a vision for the change and clearly articulat-
ing why it is needed are keys to success. fte leader needs

to work with all the stakeholders in the organization to bring about change. In any change process, there are re- sisters. Resistance occurs if there is a perceived change in vision or values or if the proposed actions cause the stakeholders to be disenfranchised (Raza & Standing, 2011; Trader-Leigh, 2001). Change is not often resisted because of the change itself but because of the role fol- lowers play or do not play in the change process. Con- flict is an output of resistance. In dealing with conflict, the leader needs to create an environment that is sup- portive so that the conflict can be discussed and ulti- mately resolved. It is the leader who needs to bring the resisters on board with the change through engagement and facilitated dialogue.
What are the tools for leading change? fte tradi-
tional approach is problem-solving. Hammond (1998) describes the basic assumption in this approach as “an organization IS a problem to be solved” (p. 24; empha- sis in original). In today’s organizations that are viewed as organic and whole systems, appreciative inquiry (AI) has been found to be more successful. Hammond (1998) describes the assumption of AI as “an organization is a mystery to be embraced” (p. 24). With an AI approach, members of an organization look at what is working and, through guided questions, explore where the organiza- tion wants to base and create new energy and positivism. A positive deviance approach is used by AI to optimize solutions already seen in the organization. Positive devi- ance distributes leadership. fte leader can serve as the leader, follower, or inquirer (Crowell, 2016).
fte AI model consists of the “four D’s”—Discovery,
Dream, Design, and Destiny. In the Discovery phase, stories are told about when the qualities of the organiza- tion were at their best. fte Dream phase explores what the organization could and should look similar to. In the Design phase, the new norms, values, structures, pat- terns of relationships, and systems emerge. In the Des- tiny phase, transformation occurs through innovation (Ludema et al., 2003; Trajkovski et al., 2013). Using the AI process facilitates engagement, strengthens relation- ships, and produces results.

Learning Organizations
Creating a learning organization is important in to- day’s environment. A successful learning organization



improves quality, creates a competitive environment, gains commitment of the workforce, manages change, is proactive, and generates collective thinking opportu- nities to improve organizational performance. Organiza- tions are currently focused on becoming High Reliability Organizations (HROs). One key characteristic of HROs is a “collective mindfulness,” which involves anticipating the unexpected and reporting it with the intent of creat- ing a safer environment. Collective mindfulness requires strong critical thinkers who are willing to speak up, and it requires deference to expertise (Weaver, 2015). Inter- professional collaborative practice is more than team- work; it is learning from each other and appreciating what each professional brings to the table.
Senge (1994) defined the five disciplines of a learning
organization: personal mastery (members of the organi- zation develop themselves based on goals and purpose), mental models (how we shape actions and decisions), shared vision (building mutually agreeable images of the future), team learning (the sum of individual talents), and systems thinking (interrelationships that shape the system—the whole is greater than the sum of its parts). Fillion and colleagues (2015) have added two new con- cepts to the five core disciplines of Senge: (1) knowledge generation and sharing and (2) organizational behav- ior. Knowledge generation and sharing has two levels: evolution and revolution. fte evolution level is focused on (a) localized exploitation of knowledge and (b) in- ternal integration of knowledge. fte revolution level includes (a) reengineering, (b) networks redesign, and
    (c) redefinition of the business. Revolution requires find-
ing new ways of doing things that does not require more work by individuals in the organization.
   fte second new concept related to learning organiza- tions is organizational behavior. With the complex and uncertain current environment, change in how leaders adapt is important. fte leader needs to use innovation to define problems and to generate new ways to resolve them. ftis includes using emotional intelligence, new ways in motivating others, effective communication strategies, and teamwork (Fillion et al., 2015).
   Many of the five disciplines have been described in the various leadership frameworks and in the complexity theory of previous sections. It is important for APNs to practice in a learning organization. ftis is an organiza- tion where their talents will best be utilized and where

positive outcomes will be achieved. APNs can seek out such organizations in which to practice, but they can also use their leadership skills to create a learning orga- nization, much as they might generate new and innova- tive ways of providing care to the clients being served. Both require the APN to become a disruptive innovator, which is discussed in the next section.

Innovation
Change and innovation are needed to move our mental model of health care from one focused on disease man- agement as the prime strategy to one with an emphasis on health and wellness. Leadership in this context means distributed leadership, understanding of professional power, cultivating relationships among and between providers, and inclusion of talents from a wide range of sources (Briggs, 2016; Dopson et al., 2008).
   White and associates (2016) identified 19 innova- tion competencies and developed a survey tool to mea- sure levels of competence in the innovation domain using a five-point Likert scale. fte researchers had the participants force rank 19 competencies to identify the top competencies by order of importance. fte top five competencies were as follows: (1) the ability to convey a compelling vision, (2) resilience, (3) the ability to recog- nize an opportunity, (4) tenacity and perseverance, and
(5) interdisciplinary teamwork and collaboration (White et al., 2016). fte researchers further identified signifi- cant gaps in all but one of the innovation competencies in their sample of nurse leaders in academia and practice. fte behaviors, skills, and attitudes of innovation compe- tence are important for APNs to possess. As APNs lead, they need to seek opportunities and innovations that can propel them forward in this new mental model. One strategy is to use disruptive innovation.

Disruptive and Catalytic Innovation
Christensen and colleagues (2006) created the disrup- tive innovation model, which challenges leaders to offer simpler, more convenient, and less expensive alternatives to underserved customers. One example of disruptive innovation in industry is Southwest Airlines, which was the first carrier to offer inexpensive no-frills flights that served an underserved market and had a major impact



on the travel industry. Frequently, leaders are either resistant to or cannot see the value of the innovation because of their mental model or patterns of thinking. Christensen and colleagues (2006) developed a subset of disruptive innovation called catalytic innovation with a focus on social change at a national level. ftey described the five qualities of catalytic innovators: (1) creating systemic social change through scaling and replication;
(2) meeting the needs of the overserved (people who receive services that are not needed) or underserved;
(3) offering services that are simpler and less costly but perceived as appropriate for what is needed; (4) gener- ating resources that are considered unattractive by com- petitors; and (5) tolerating being disparaged by their competitors, who see their market as unprofitable or unattractive (Christensen et al., 2006). Being a disrup- tive innovator requires creativity at all levels within an organization or as an individual.
   At a national level, the changes predicted to char- acterize health-care reform in the future could lead to catalytic innovation. Realigning the health-care system to ensure access, improve quality, and add value while slowing the rate of inflation offers attractive opportu- nities for innovation. ftose who are creative and can adapt their mental models will be successful in future health-care delivery. Some of these disruptive innova- tions in health care include precision medicine, big data, and mergers, such as AETNA purchasing CVS to create a comprehensive payer system. However, to make these changes successful, it also requires a lens on health eq- uity (Galea, 2018). Transforming the system requires numerous changes, including (a) matching clinician skills to the level of the problem, (b) investing in tech- nology that simplifies complex problems, (c) creating new care-delivery systems, and (d) changing regulations that impede progress toward this end (Christensen et al., 2000). ftese changes require collaboration across the spectrum of health care. As health care is reimagined, the design needs to come from the outside versus the in- side. ftis will create a mindset change that disrupts how health care is provided. One prime example of disrup- tive innovation is the role of the APN. fte APN offers services that meet the needs of both the overserved and the underserved. APNs provide services in communities that physicians may view as unprofitable or unattractive for their practice. fte services provided are frequently

simpler and less costly and meet the needs of the con- sumers in different ways from those that physicians provide.
   Rogers’s diffusion of innovation theory explicates the process of change in a complex environment (Rogers, 2003). ftere are five stages of innovation and change:
(1) knowledge, (2) persuasion, (3) decision making,
(4) implementation, and (5) confirmation. Decision making is the tipping point in this process. When one gets to the decision-making phase of change, one can de- cide to be the innovator or can choose the opposite and be the laggard. Where individuals fall on this spectrum is distributed in a normal bell curve.
   APNs have a unique opportunity to be change agents based on their educational preparation and their ability to champion best practices in organizations. ftey serve as leaders in organizations where change and innovation thrive. One example is the retail health clinics, such as those at CVS. Retail clinics have served as change agents for primary care with APNs leading this initiative in dis- ruptive innovation. APNs have carved out a market in primary care by making services more available to the majority of consumers. ftey have focused on the triple aim of access, cost, and quality in designing this market for consumers.

Blue Ocean Strategy
In their book Blue Ocean Strategy, Kim and Mauborgne (2015) describe different strategies for growing health- care practices. In a blue ocean strategy, the goal is to “grow demand and break away from the competition” (p. xiii), whereas in a red ocean strategy, there is bloody competition for the same market space. fte differences in approach arise from how organizations approach the marketplace, competition, demand, value, cost, and differentiation.
  fte key to blue ocean success is that it focuses on differentiation of services and providers and lower costs. It is not an either/or proposition. In providing a frame- work to create the new value curve, the authors identify four areas where questions should be asked: raise, reduce, create, and eliminate. For example, in looking at oppor- tunities for APNs in the new health-care reform envi- ronment, planners might ask, “What factors should be created in the new health-care industry that have never



been offered before?” Similarly, they might ask, “What factors should be eliminated in the new health-care in- dustry that have previously been taken for granted?” Blue ocean strategy is defined through a “reconstruc- tionist” lens. In the reconstructionist view, there are no boundaries, and there is demand that is untapped. fte focus is on creation of value innovation, which is similar to the disruptive innovation described earlier.
   If we look at the current health-care system and the role of the APN, blue ocean strategy is a perfect frame- work to lead health-care change. APNs need to think about creating new models across the system rather than competing from within the system.
   An example of blue ocean strategy is the transitional care model defined by Mary Naylor. Naylor and her col- leagues (2004) conducted a randomized controlled trial to examine the effectiveness of a transitional care inter- vention delivered by APNs to elders hospitalized with heart failure. fte sample included 239 patients age 65 and older hospitalized with heart failure. A 3-month, APN-directed discharge planning program and home follow-up protocol was implemented. Results demon- strated an increase in the length of time between hospital discharge and readmission or death as well as reduced health-care costs. If we look at this model in terms of blue ocean strategy, the APNs were not competing with other services but rather served as a liaison between hos- pital and home care services. ftey recognized no bound- aries and offered a service that was in demand. ftey differentiated themselves from other markets at a lower cost with improved outcomes.

ENTREPRENEUR VS INTRAPRENEUR

Entrepreneurship and intrapreneurship have been in the business literature for many decades, but they have not been seen to a great extent in the nursing literature. fte Oxford English Dictionary (OED) defines an entrepreneur as “a person who organizes and operates a business or businesses, taking on greater than normal financial risks in order to do so” (2020a). Entrepreneurs are risk tak- ers, willing to work in ambiguity and uncertainty; they are ambitious, determined, and self-challenging and have strong leadership characteristics (Gundogdu, 2012). APNs need to be educated in the entrepreneurial skills

needed to open and succeed in their own practices. Fre- quently, APNs encounter disabling factors that deter them from succeeding as entrepreneurs. ftese disablers include lack of business skills, lack of knowledge or training in en- trepreneurship, and lack of peer mentoring (Elango et al., 2007; Shirey, 2007). Elango and colleagues (2007) fur- ther identify three groups of barriers for nurses in entre- preneurship: (1) legal and regulatory barriers, (2) ethical and personal conflicts, and (3) knowledge barriers. Legal barriers and issues include regulatory requirements and the legal complications of opening a business. Ethical and personal conflicts surround the general belief that nursing is about caring, whereas business is about making money, that being competitive is somehow counter to the ethos of nursing. Knowledge barriers, specifically lack of business and management skills, can be overcome through formal continuing education programs as well as through sup- port from professional organizations and peers. ftese bar- riers should not preclude the APN from venturing into business. fte only insurmountable barrier at this time is state regulations that prevent APNs from practicing to the full extent of their license; and this issue needs to be re- solved in those states that limit practice authority.
Cadmus and associates (2017) conducted a needs as-
sessment with 372 New Jersey APNs to assess their busi- ness and practice management knowledge and skills. fte survey included 14 categories for competency develop- ment. ftese competencies were then organized into three categories—opportunity recognition, overcoming barriers, and operational competencies—based on Bhave’s (1994) original model of entrepreneurship. Opportunity recogni- tion includes networking skills, identifying opportunities, and the ability to determine risk. Overcoming barriers in- cludes having knowledge of health-care payment systems and business skills. Operational competencies include hu- man resource management and quality metrics manage- ment. In this survey, APNs rated their knowledge and skills at the novice to advanced beginner level (see Table 21.1). fte knowledge and skills needed to be entrepreneurial is imperative for APNs. It is important to recognize that al- though this survey was conducted in New Jersey, it is rep- resentative of a national gap in knowledge for APNs.
In contrast to an entrepreneur, an intrapreneur works
within an existing business or company. According to the OED (2020b), an intrapreneur is a “manager within a company who promotes innovative product




   TaBle 21.1	
APN Business and Leadership Competencies

NoviceHealth-Care Structure Financial ManagementAdvanced BeginnerBusiness Planning Systems ManagementLegal Regulatory IssuesMarketingHuman Resources ManagementQuality MeasurementIdentifying Business OpportunitiesLeadership and Strategic ManagementCompetentNetworking Personal InitiativesSource: Adapted from Cadmus, E., Johansen, M. Zimmer, P., & Knowlton, D. (2017). Entrepreneurship: Assessing the readiness of the NJ APN workforce. Nursing Administration Quarterly, 41(4), 48–55.

development and marketing.” Pinchot (1985) defines the intrapreneur as a person who makes a new business into a reality within his or her organization despite barriers and risks. Intrapreneurs need team building and leader- ship skills, must be willing to make rapid decisions, must be innovative, and should have a firm grasp of business

professional association meetings; (d) accepting leader- ship roles within those voluntary agencies or professional associations; (e) publishing your findings in your area of practice; (f ) presenting at national, state, or community groups or associations; and (g) simply providing your business card to others.
   For new and experienced APNs, professional orga- nizations at both the state and national levels provide a formal structure for networking. Frequently, there are specific forums that address professional development opportunities and bring APNs together to deal with political or legislative issues related to practice. As the health-care landscape changes, it is critical that APNs network to determine opportunities for new areas of practice. Building strategic alliances can advance issues for APNs (Begley et al., 2014; Elliott, 2017).
   Networking internally and externally are equally im- portant. Looking for forums that are interprofessional is important for gaining perspective from outside of the profession. ftis can be achieved through participation in committees or consortia that are formed at a com- munity, state, or national level. Engaging with the state nursing association can provide a forum for local issues and concerns to be voiced.

MENTORING

and the marketplace. ftey create needed change with-	 	

out direction from the top leadership (Gundogdu, 2012; Pinchot, 1985). APNs can become intrapreneurs within the organization or practice in which they work, looking for opportunities and then developing that vision into a reality within an organization.

NETWORKING

Networking is defined by Merriam-Webster.com. (n.d.). as “the exchange of information or services, among in- dividuals, groups, or institutions; specifically, the cul- tivation of productive relationships for employment or business.” Professional networks are important for job opportunities, professional identity, and obtain- ing available resources for the patients being served. Rojas-Guyler and colleagues (2007) describe some of the key ways to develop a network: (a) identifying contacts from current or past experiences; (b) getting involved in voluntary agencies outside of your work; (c) attending

Dorsey and Baker (2004) describe mentoring as a planned relationship between an experienced person and one with less experience for the purpose of achieving identified outcomes. Joel (1997) describes mentorship as a “patron relationship/system” with varying levels of power, influence, and engagement on a continuum. fte continuum goes from the mentor level, which is the most intense, to the level of “peer pals” (peers helping peers), which is the least intense. Mentors may have been role models or preceptors but the opposite may not be true. Mentoring is helping the protégé develop profes- sionally. Mentoring can be either formal or informal in design. Formal mentoring is where a mentor is assigned within an organization. fte question of being assigned a mentor is controversial. Mentor–protégé relationships cannot be forced but must be considered mutually ac- ceptable to both parties. Informal mentoring is where the two parties find each other. Barker (2006) identi- fies key aspects of the mentor–protégé relationship that



should be considered from the beginning. ftey include the following:
1. Select a mentor who communicates with, and does not talk at, the protégé.
2. It is best if there is no line authority between the mentor and protégé where job security is at issue.
3. fte mentor and protégé should have a “good fit” (similar styles, communication patterns, availabil- ity, and focus on goal attainment).
4. Mentors who derive energy from oppressive rela- tionships should be avoided.
5. fte mentor and protégé should both recognize that the relationship will change over time.
   When considering a mentor, it is not essential that the mentor be within one’s own field; however, they must meet the professional growth need identified.
   fte Fellows of the American Academy of Nurse Prac- titioners (AANP, 2006) conducted a 1-day think tank with new and experienced NPs. ftey separated their findings based on years of experience in the field. ftey found that new NPs needed mentoring in several areas, including time management and productivity; man- aging caseloads of patients; developing clinical skills; overcoming fear and anxiety; and dealing with isolation, business practices, and work-life balance issues (AANP, 2006). ftis list could help set goals for new APNs in their mentor–protégé relationships (Harrington, 2011). Mentoring for experienced NPs took on different ar- eas of need. fteir needs included networks for communi- cation; dealing with burnout; development in education, research, and publishing; need for a change; keeping up skills; and the ability to be mentors themselves (AANP, 2006). Mentors that could be helpful for this group of NPs included peers, educators, researchers, and leaders

both inside and outside the profession (AANP, 2006). For example, the National Organization of Nurse Prac- titioner Faculties (NONPF) has developed and imple- mented a leadership mentoring program to prepare and empower new leaders in nurse practitioner education (NONPF, 2018).
   Mentorship is even more critical during times of uncertainty. A mentor can help the APN identify new opportunities and provide advice and support for ca- reer development, which is vital. Joel (1997) describes how we can help build strength in the nursing ranks by mentoring others. It is the responsibility of those who have experience and expertise to become mentors to new APNs. It is also the responsibility of the protégé to ensure that their objectives and needs are made evident to the mentor and that there is follow-through with the protégé’s career plan.

SUMMARY


ftis chapter has provided an overview of various lead- ership theories and frameworks and applied them to the role of the APN. ftere is no more critical time than now for APNs to take the lead in changing the health-care sys- tem. Change requires engagement by the individual APN as well as courage to lead in this complex world. Business management skills, entrepreneurship or intrapreneurship characteristics, and innovation competencies are needed for the future. Failure to assume a leadership role is not an option. APNs need to be disruptive innovators and seek out blue ocean opportunities to make a difference in
U.S. health care. Networking through professional orga- nizations and utilizing mentors can provide the support needed to prepare APNs for the challenges ahead.















Information Technology and the Advanced Practice Nurse
Robert Scoloveno




Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Describe the existing and emerging technologies available to the advanced practice nurse (APN) to enhance clinical practice.
• Develop an understanding of health information technologies (HIT) available to
the APN.
• Demonstrate the ability to evaluate and utilize different electronic patient record software.
• Understand the three types of health information exchanges (HIE) and how they
are utilized in clinical practice.
• Understand the utilization of high-fidelity simulation and virtual reality as an educational pedagogy to train the student APN and also ensure competency of the practicing APN.




INTRODUCTION

fte rapid changes in health-care delivery require a focus on quality and safety for all recipients of health-care services. fte Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI) Triple Aim Initiative (2020) proposes three goals
386

for quality improvement: (1) improve patient-centered quality care, (2) support proven interventions,  and
(3) reduce the cost of care. One of the priorities of the Triple Aim Initiative is the provision of effective preven- tion and treatment practices. ftese aims and practices are affected by health information technology (HIT)



innovations that are changing the landscape of advanced practice nursing. fte Institute of Medicine (IOM) (2011) in its report on nursing’s future emphasizes the ex- panding role of advanced practice nurses (APNs) and the need for HIT to coordinate quality and safe care across health professionals. ftere is no question that there is growing emphasis on HIT in health care as is evident by the increasing role of government in HIT innovation and implementation.
  fte Health Information Technology for Economic Clinical Health Act (HITECH), part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, established the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Informa- tion Technology (ONC) into law. ONC is charged with ensuring private and protected electronic health infor- mation. ONC’s authorization includes the implemen- tation and meaningful use (MU) of electronic health records (EHRs) to improve quality, safety, and efficiency of health care (ONC, 2020). fte adoption of HIT in the United States has been augmented by the MU financial incentive program offered to individual health providers and health-care systems under the Medicare/Medicaid program. fte Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Ser- vices (CMS) have developed objectives and criteria to determine if a provider qualifies to receive incentives. For example, MU in prescribing and dispensing medications may qualify for reimbursement (Jones et al., 2014; ONC, 2020). fte Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) also focuses on strategies to secure EHRs and to use HIT to improve quality and cost-effectiveness in the management of the health and health care of individuals and groups. AHRQ disseminates evidence on how HIT improves quality health care (AHRQ, 2015). Further, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (In- novation Center), established under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010, is charged with testing innovative care and payment models such as the Quality Payment Program, many of which require a HIT infrastructure (CMS, 2020b).
ftis chapter presents examples of HIT including the
EHR, clinical decision support (CDS), the computer- ized provider order entry (CPOE), and health infor- mation exchanges (HIE). Clinical and educational uses of HIT are discussed as they are related to genetics or genomics and high-fidelity simulation.

ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD


fte EHR is a systematic compilation and management of patient health information that can be shared with other providers and across health-care settings. fte goals of EHRs include improvement in quality, safety, and efficiency of health care (CMS, 2020a). fte EHR is designed for information sharing not only among providers but between providers and patients. With the provider-patient EHR functionality, patients can have access to their health records, including medical infor- mation, laboratory results, summaries, and plans. Pa- tients can also designate individuals who may have access to their records (McMullen et al., 2014). fte patient’s history, immunizations, laboratory data, medications, progress, and problems are included in the EHR. Ad- vanced EHRs have the additional functions of HIE, the CPOE, and CDS. See Table 22.1 for clinical consid- erations regarding EHR implementation (Saifee et al., 2020).
MU of EHRs focuses on quality, safety, and
patient-centered outcomes. fte MU program provides financial incentives to qualified providers of Medicare and Medicaid patients to use certified electronic records. fte MU EHR incentive program has the following cen- tral objectives: (a) protection of patient health record information, (b) use of CDS, (c) CPOE, (d) electronic prescribing, (e) HIE, (f ) education specific to the pa- tient, (g) medication reconciliation for transitions in care, (h) patient electronic access, (i) secure messaging, and (j) public health reporting (e.g., immunizations) (CMS, 2015). To receive an incentive payment, an MU-certified EHR that meets MU objectives and crite- ria must be used (Ziran & O’Pry, 2020). APNs are eli- gible for incentives under the Medicaid program but are not recognized as eligible providers under the Medicare MU incentive program (Buerhaus, 2020).
ftere are benefits and disadvantages of EHRs. Among
the clinical benefits, EHRs and their tools have increased provider adherence to evidence-based guidelines and led to a reduction in medication errors. Specific EHR func- tion and process benefits are e-prescribing, built-in alerts, CDS, and patient access to health records. Organizational benefits include cost savings and accuracy in billing and coding. Potential problems of EHR implementation are


   Table 22.1	
Select List of Electronic Health Records Clinical Function

Clinical FunctionOperational DefinitionMaintain patient recordEach patient will have exactly one record.Capture and manage patient demographicsCapture and maintain clinically relevant patient information.Manage medicationsCreate and maintain patient-specific medication lists.Document and manage patient historyClear review and management of medical, procedural/surgical, social and family history.Manage clinical documentsCreate, addend, correct, authenticate, and close, as needed, transcribed or directly entered clinical documentation and notes.Manage patient-care ordersTrack care provider–specific orders.Order diagnostic testsAllows for submission of diagnostic test orders.Manage resultsRoute, manage, and present current and historical test results to appropriate clinical personnel for review with the ability to filter and compare results.Support for drug interaction checkingIdentify drug interaction warnings at the point of medication ordering.Present alerts for preventive services and wellnessAt the point of clinical decision making, identify patient-specific suggestions/reminders, screening tests/examinations, and other preventive services in support of routine preventive and wellness patient care standards.Provide interprovider communication regarding patient informationAllows for secure electronic communication between providers to trigger or respond to health concerns that patients may exhibit.

costs related to adoption, implementation, and main- tenance; ongoing training; and disruption in workflow (Saifee et al., 2020). ftere also have been problems with how EHRs are designed and how they perform, frag- mentation in interoperability, lack of training and com- petence among users, and fear for privacy and safety of health information (Narcisse et al., 2013).
   McMullen and colleagues (2014) discuss the possible threats to privacy and security of EHRs. ftese threats may emerge because of transparent security measures

can play an important role in the privacy and security of records by using predetermined secure passwords, send- ing e-mails or texts only if there is certainty that only the recipient has access to the account, following up when there is a belief that there is erroneous information, and participating in professional development on electronic security and privacy (McMullen et al., 2014).

DATABASES FOR CLINICAL DECISION MAKING/EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE

and poor password management. fte Health Insurance	 	

Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) ex- panded its privacy and security rules to adopt national standards for electronic health-care technology. fte Pri- vacy Rule provides standards for protection of individ- ual health information, whereas the Security Rule sets standards for electronic protected health information (e-PHI) (Office for Civil Rights [OCR], 2017). APNs

Health Information Exchanges
Health information exchanges (HIEs) are computerized systems that allow patient information to follow the pa- tient from practice to practice and during transitions in care. fte goal of HIE is to provide coordination of care in an effective, efficient manner. fte three types of HIEs



are (1) directed exchange, whereby providers receive or send secure, encrypted patient information such as pa- tient summaries and laboratory data; (2) query-based exchange, allowing the provider to discover health infor- mation about the patient, usually in unplanned care such as emergency departments; and (3) consumer-mediated exchange where consumers are given access to their health information and can share that information with health-care providers and make informed decisions (Esmaeilzadeh et al., 2020). Freeman and associates (2018) discuss research results of the benefits and barriers in implementing HIEs in primary care. HIEs improve work efficiency, resulting in improved access to labora- tory results, improvement in referrals, and better claims processing. ftey also provide a cost savings, especially in the cost of laboratories that deliver test results. Other cost savings reported include reduction in staff time and decreased need for support staff. Another benefit is im- provement in quality and safety of care. ftere is emerg- ing research that offer some evidence that HIEs promote better patient outcomes, reduce patient admissions in hospitals, and lead to fewer prescribing errors. Barriers to HIEs include costs for connectivity, hardware, software, transaction fees, and maintenance. Additional barriers include concerns about privacy and liability. Patients may be wary about sharing their health information, and providers need to trust entities in which they share patient information. Liability concerns are also a barrier to HIT in general and HIE specifically. Providers must be cautious both about not acting on patient data and about acting when the data are inaccurate (Hypponen et al., 2019).

Artificial Intelligence
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a wide-ranging branch of computer science concerned with building smart ma- chines capable of performing tasks that typically require human intelligence (Built-In, 2020). For the APN, AI has potential in patient care, health records, claims databases, clinical data registries, and accessing data from the CMS (Vanderhoff, 2020). Although the clinical ideations of AI relative to health care were introduced to help man- age large electronic data sets, there has been increasing focus on clinical implications (Khan, 2020). Because there has been resistance among health-care providers

and consumers to share data in the past, AI has been gaining increasing attention for patient care applications (Kim et al., 2017). AI has been used to detect early di- abetic neuropathy during eye examinations; predict risk for heart attack, stroke, heart failure, and death from car- diac MRIs; improve the accuracy of mammograms; and catch medication errors. More recently, AI has been used to identify patients at high risk for complications from COVID-19, help forecast hospital-capacity needs for COVID-19 patients, detect COVID-19 infection from thoracic computed tomography (CT) scans, and predict COVID-19 induced mental health disorders among health-care workers (?osi? et al., 2020). As AI becomes more readily available, the APN will need to develop ways to incorporate this technology into patient care.

Computerized Provider Order Entry
fte computerized provider order entry (CPOE) is a technology system that allows clinicians to enter med- ication orders into a computer and to transmit orders directly to a pharmacy. At the least, the CPOE has the potential to enhance patient safety by ensuring that or- ders are legible and complete. fte CPOE is paired with the CDS system, which provides prescription-related in- formation on drug safety, allergies, and toxic reactions based on patient laboratory results or drug-to-drug in- teractions (AHRQ, 2020). A review of studies found that CPOE reduced the number of medication errors be- tween 37% and 80%. However, some studies found that CPOE did not have positive effects because of incon- gruent workflows and clinician “alert fatigue,” whereby the clinician ignored critical alerts because of excessive nonspecific alerts (Jones et al., 2014). fte CPOE and CDS technologies are complex and require health-care organizations to identify goals and workflow needs (Hasman et al., 2018). CPOE and CDS systems also need to guard against “alert fatigue” by designing sys- tems that provide more specific, evidence-based alerts.

Clinical Decision Support
Clinical decision support (CDS) provides timely evidence-based information to clinicians, staff, patients, and others to inform decisions as care is being deliv- ered. CDS tools include particular condition order sets,



focused patient data sets, health preventive care remind- ers, computerized alerts, clinical guidelines, and health information databases (AHRQ, 2020). Examples of the use of CDS applications in a variety of clinical areas of care include (a) screening, immunizations, guidelines for secondary prevention; (b) diagnosis-specific treatment guidelines, drug management, dosage, alerts for drug in- teractions, and drug formulary guidelines; and (c) alerts about duplicative testing (Reed et al., 2020).

Operational Applications of HIT
Human resources will be affected because of HIT im- plementation. Changes may include decreases in some areas such as administration and increases in specialty areas such as health-care informatics. ftere continues to be a heightened focus on a geographical shift of health professionals from big cities to rural communities and a shift of health-care delivery from tertiary care facilities to the community and home. Roles of health-care profes- sionals will also change. For example, APNs may be able to expand on the ability to provide minor surgical pro- cedures in rural settings with medical assistance through telecommunication and robotics (Layon et al., 2018).
fte adoption of EHRs, HIEs, and CDS has facili-
tated health-care management, improved coordination and communication between patient and provider, and reinforced safety. However, as the focus of care manage- ment shifts to the community and a population health focus, there is a gap in technology and HIT interoper- ability as community settings struggle to keep up with changing technological needs (Abbott & Weinger, 2020). Gill and colleagues (2020) highlight the efforts and challenges of data standardization, system interop- erability, and HIE in community settings, stating that there is still work that needs to be done on policy and implementation of HITs in these settings because no two communities are exactly the same.
Staffing decisions in organizations using HIT should
focus on the organization’s priorities in maximizing quality and safety as well as improving efficiency. ftese staffing decisions should also focus more on retraining staff than on staff reduction. A different care manage- ment approach is optimizing the roles of the interdisci- plinary team because of HIT implementation (Baillieu et al., 2020).

CLINICAL AND EDUCATIONAL APPLICATIONS


Genetics and Genomics
Scientific discoveries in the field of genomics are rap- idly changing the delivery of care by APNs and other health-care providers. Genetic or genomic information personalizes care because much of individual disease susceptibility and response to medications is thought to have a genetic component (Edwards & Maradiegue, 2020). Leading causes of morbidity and mortality, such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, and diabetes, all have a genetic element that is influenced by lifestyle and en- vironmental factors. Although medications are given in accurate doses and taken correctly, adverse drug ef- fects may occur because of individual genetic markers (Wright et al., 2019). Wolf and colleagues (2020) pos- tulate that the advances in genetics and genomics have the potential to provide personalized genomic treatment to the patient, but there are legal considerations that health-care providers must be aware of. An example of personalized genomic treatment is found in the field of oncology. Cancer research and treatment have made remarkable advances because of the sequencing of the person’s entire genome and the tumor genome (Walker et al., 2019). Cancer risk assessment, tumor outlining, pharmacogenomics treatment, and targeted therapy are now possible (Moore et al., 2020).
It is evident that genetics and genomics research and
technology will provide APNs and other health-care pro- viders as well as the recipients of health care with import- ant diagnostic and therapeutic information. Screening of individuals across the developmental spectrum can identify and characterize health conditions, spotlight the risk of genetic abnormalities and disease, and inform management (McCormick & Calzone, 2016). Brennan (2015) points out that the pharmacological management of individuals often depends on the APN’s knowledge of genetics and pharmacogenomics testing. Microarray testing can identify individuals who are poor metaboliz- ers, slow metabolizers, or normal metabolizers of specific drugs. APNs need knowledge from relevant HIT data- bases to increase their knowledge of pharmacogenomics and to decide which patients to test and how to interpret the results (Brennan, 2015).



  APNs also need to be aware of the industry for direct-to-consumer (DTC) personal genetic and per- sonal genomic testing to explain susceptibility to disease. fte expectation of the consumer may be for the APN to interpret the findings and help in their health-care deci- sion making (Mahmoud-Davis, 2020). fte dilemma is that there are insufficient regulations on DTC genetic tests and the laboratories that perform these tests, es- pecially given that health care is transitioning from ge- netics to genomics. Knowledge of the risks and benefits of these tests is relatively unknown (Mahmoud-Davis, 2020; Marchant et al., 2020). With all these advances, APNs need knowledge of genetics and genomics, pre- dictive genetic testing, and DTC testing. ftey must also be aware of ethical challenges, policies, and standards relative to genetics and genomics and how advances in knowledge in this field will improve interventions.

High-Fidelity Simulation
and Advanced Practice Nursing
Simulation is defined as a technology for practice and learning in health care that can be applied to many dis- ciplines (Gaba, 2004). It has been a teaching strategy for educating nurses for many years. Simulation is a recommended strategy to teach safe clinical practice, in part because initial learning for health-care profession- als in a real patient setting is hindered by shorter length of patient stays, higher patient acuity, staff shortages, and greater emphasis on medical errors (Kang et al., 2020).
   Maintaining skills competencies can be challenging for APNs (Stephenson et al., 2015). It is important for APNs to maintain competence not only in high-risk, low-frequency skills but also with emerging HITs, such as EHRs. High-fidelity simulation is a strategy that can allow APNs to maintain competency as well as to de- velop more confidence in the use of HIT in a wide vari- ety of situations and clinical settings, including complex patients, emergent situations, and low-frequency patient encounters—all without risk to actual patients. Utilizing simulated experiences in advanced practice curricula as well as in competency measurement can ensure success- ful outcomes for patients. In fact, simulation has also been shown to improve clinical reasoning skills in APN practitioners (Mompoint-Williams et al., 2014).
  
Individual high-fidelity scenarios can utilize other technologies available to APNs such as noninvasive test- ing and electronic patient records. fte technology of simulation allows for additional training beyond the tra- ditional didactic approach. Because the clinical environ- ment may not lend itself to routine exposure to certain skills, the simulated environment becomes paramount in maintaining competency and positive patient outcomes. Setting up the simulation experience is very important to ensuring that learning objectives are met. fte partic- ipants will be able to perform realistic scenarios only in environments that mirror the real-world setting. Also, participants must be able to reflect on their experience during a debriefing period. ftis important learning tool should immediately follow the simulated experience and allow participants to give honest feedback on what went well and what they may have done differently.
ftere is evidence that simulated experiences are bene-
ficial to APNs. In a study by Kowitlawakul and associates (2015), APN students in Singapore reported increased confidence in their ability to care for patients in the clin- ical setting after participating in various simulated expe- riences. Participants also felt that the experiences were useful in helping to develop skills in history taking, com- munication, and caring for patients with rapidly chang- ing conditions. Simulation is also effective for APNs in maintaining competency. In a study of neonatal nurse practitioners, Stephenson and colleagues (2015) found that nurses who participated in a respiratory distress simulation had better retention of knowledge and were all able to successfully intubate the simulator at 3 and 6 months postsimulation experience.

Virtual Reality and the Advanced Practice Nurse
Virtual reality (VR) is a three-dimensional immersive technological innovation that offers APNs the ability to become “inserted” into a virtual environment. fte use of sophisticated eyewear allows for the most realistic expe- rience available, highly similar and replicable to real-life activities. VR can be advantageous when compared with carrying out training activities in the real world because it provides a controlled environment and practice set- ting for advanced skills acquisition (Ng et al., 2019). fte use of virtual and augmented reality technology has



been recently considered as a new approach to promot- ing healthy behavior and providing patient education (Ahn & Grace, 2017). Moreover, the growth of Internet applications has substantially broadened the potential for VR’s use in global telehealth (Guthold et al., 2018). Using VR to promote health and healthy activity is an emerging concept and needs to be explored further.
   Data capture is an important element and benefit of VR training. In a real-world setting, it may be difficult or impractical to measure patient learning. In VR, it is possible to gather data that may be impossible to capture otherwise, such as the amount of eye contact that the pa- tient makes with the nurse. ftus, data capture of patient responses to interactions provides the unique opportu- nity to assess and foster improved therapeutic communi- cation when developing skills in working with individuals struggling with opioid use disorders (OUDs), substance use disorders (SUDs), and mental health issues.

Technology and the Public Health APN
fte American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) regards public health nursing as vital to im- proving the nation’s health and recommends nursing curricular changes be explored (AACN, 2020). ftere is a need to ensure that educators improve current curricula and develop new ones that address public health nursing competencies, such as interprofessional communication, collaboration, and team building as well as ensure that these competencies are operationalized (McNeal, 2019). In the 16th Annual Report to the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the U.S. Congress (2018), it was reported that there is also a need to ensure that core

competencies for public health nurses are met through innovative clinical experience and interprofessional education (IPE) as well as ensuring that competencies are evaluated using standardized evaluation tools. fte changing health-care system in the United States has re- sulted in an emerging trend of caring for patients outside the hospital in alternative community-based settings. As a result, APNs will have to broaden the scope of avail- able clinical opportunities needed to train future educa- tors and health professionals (Joyce et al., 2017). Studies confirm that not only is there a gap in faculty knowledge relative to simulation education and technology but that faculty without formal education are not fully aware of their training needs, their lack of competence, or even what training is available (Waxman et al., 2019).

SUMMARY


Health care is becoming more and more global, and the effective use of technology will be necessary for APNs to provide effective nursing care. Emerging technologies such as telehealth and virtual reality will be available to health-care professionals and patients. Telehealth and any new emerging technological advancements should be in- tegrated with existing HIT systems to increase the quality of care in patients in underserved areas. APNs have used information technologies to document health history and physical findings, evaluate laboratory and procedure findings, order tests and medications, and to bill for pa- tient services (Rawson et al., 2019). It is imperative that with emerging HITs, APNs have the education to im- plement and evaluate these technologies in patient care.















Writing for Publication
Shirley A. Smoyak






Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Design personal strategies for getting into the habit of writing for publication.
• Select from the many types of publications for which to write, including letters to the editor and professional newsletters.
• Understand the differences between writing for refereed journals vs. book chapters
and other non-refereed media.
• Determine how to know what is known and what is not about a particular topic.
• Write in an expository style.
• Design literature reviews by selecting key words and search options.
• Understand how the review process is designed and how the reviews affect poten- tial authors.




INTRODUCTION

Nurses have good ideas. ftese ideas stem from their education and experience, where nurses learn that ob- servation is the bedrock of practice. Nurses observe not only with their eyes but with all their other senses as well, including intuition. Sharing these observations leads to

improved clinical practice. Others with whom these observations are shared can create a scholarly dialogue, the outcome of which might be evidence-based practice or hypotheses for study.
   Although all registered nurses (RNs) are good observ- ers, advanced practice nurses (APNs) need to share their observations by writing for publication. Unfortunately,


393



the skills for such writing are often not taught in their academic programs of study. fte intent of this chapter is to provide the needed background so that writing becomes not only a goal but an actual achievement.
   Before delving into specific suggestions for writing for publication, I first want to let you know what not to do. Never attempt to write your first sentence first. ftis should be the last thing that you do. Concentrate in- stead on what your final message will be. What is it that your readers should have as a “take home”? What points do you want them to remember? fte second thing not to do is to write in the second person, because that can sometimes sound preachy. However, you can see that I am already doing that. I chose to use the second person because I want my message delivered to you as if I were actually facing you in a conversation. It’s unfortunate that chapters in books don’t allow readers to have easy dialogue with authors.

HOW TO GET THE WRITING HABIT

Eons ago, when a guest lecturer at the Rutgers Univer- sity Alexander Library in New Brunswick, New Jersey, delivered his suggestions to the invited audience of ed- itors and authors, he shared this piece of advice, and it has remained with me: “Writing should be like brushing your teeth or walking your dog.” His points were: (a) Habits are automatic; make writing automatic. (b) Select the time of day when you are at your sharpest. Are you a morning or an evening person? When do you do your best thinking and working? (c) Assure a space where you will not be interrupted. Choose a place at home where your closed door means to others that you are not to be disturbed. It is probably much more difficult to dedicate such a space and time at work. (d) Limit your writing to 30 minutes; fewer minutes might work, but don’t try for an hour.
What you write should be simply what comes to your
mind. Develop sentences from the rambling thoughts that go around in your head. Don’t worry about punctu- ation and syntax. Just commit words to your document. ftese words should come from your own experiences, ideas, issues, or concerns. ftey might also be observa- tions (from any of your senses) that you have never artic- ulated as written descriptions. If you are staring at your

blank screen and are at a loss about what to write, start with what you observed yesterday, or this morning, or what happened as you dreamt.
   Making a commitment to yourself to write daily will assure that writing becomes a part of yourself, a new You. You might find it useful to share this commitment with a relative or close friend. If you have children or teens, they need to know about this new approach of yours and to honor your request to be left alone during your writing time. If need be, walk the dog first. Your teeth can probably wait.

APPROACHES TO WRITING


Just as I suggested that you never try to write the first sentence first, another thing not to do first is to attempt to write an article for a professional journal. ftere are easier, simpler approaches (e.g., the first few items in the text that follows) that are more likely to get your name in print when you are starting out as a writer.

Published Minutes
Organizations that publish their minutes, either digitally or in print, need someone to write articulate sentences. If the organization wants others (members and nonmem- bers) to know what their meetings have addressed, then a fuller account of what happened is necessary. Reprinting the agenda with associated resolutions is not sufficient. ftis role does not have to fall within the domain of the elected secretary; volunteers may offer to take this on with the approval of the president or board. ftere needs to be an agreement about whether or not these full min- utes will be edited and by whom.

Letters to the Editor
Letters to the editor are welcomed by most professional nursing societies and associations for their newspapers or shorter, published reports. Local and state newspapers also welcome such letters. fte letter may agree or disagree with a recent news report or article. Be sure to cite the entire source to which you are referring. Your statements may be based on your own experiences, or you may use resources from the literature. Your letter should follow the



format of those that have already been printed. Timeli- ness is a factor; waiting too long (more than a week) after publication of the item to which you want to respond is not a good idea. If your letter refers to a journal article, then the prior issue should be the focus. If you are writing about a book, then the most recent printing is needed.
   Another format is to write about an issue that you think needs more attention by the press. For instance, for a nursing journal, you might address a new clinical phe- nomenon that has not been covered in recent months. You might also want the editor to develop a special issue addressing the DNP/PhD approaches to the doctorate or why all specialty associations should be integrated with the American Nurses Association.

Newsletter Articles or Reports
New clinical ideas or interventions that are not system- atic studies or actual research can be described as inno- vations. To do this, of course, the management of the unit, agency, or hospital must agree that they want this information to be disclosed. If you are writing a short opinion piece, unless management or administration is addressed in it, then the work can be offered as yours alone. Minutes sometimes refer to a project having been completed by the association or one that is being planned. Expanded descriptions would lend themselves to reports.
   Also, associations sometimes publish reports of pro- ceedings of a convention or conference. ftese include short synopses of keynote addresses or major presenta- tions. fte next section describes how these may become monographs.

Monographs
Societies or associations occasionally publish the pro- ceedings of conventions or conferences in an expanded format. To produce a monograph, the keynote and major presenters must submit an expanded synopsis of their talks or workshops, sometimes including illustra- tions, tables, or graphs. Your role in such an endeavor might be (a) that you are the presenter who submits your document for the monograph, or (b) that you volun- teer to be the editor who prepares the separate pieces for publication.

Book or Video Reviews
Nursing journals and newspapers publish book or video reviews much less frequently now that online avenues for dissemination of such reviews have entered our media possibilities. Ten years ago, many journals had a specific column for reviews and even a column editor. ftat is no longer the case. On the other hand, if there is a ground- breaking book, such as that by the Institute of Medicine (IOM), The Future of Nursing (2011), then not only is there a book review but many more reviewers expressing analyses.
   fte previous subsections are volunteer efforts; writ- ers rarely are paid for their products. For the next sec- tions, there may be payment of some form, such as an honorarium.

Chapters in Books
To be asked to write a chapter for a book, you first have to be an expert in your field and recognized as such. You will have come to the attention of your colleagues by having presented speeches, lectures, workshops, videos, or journal articles with increasing frequency. fte focus of these books may be entirely clinical phenomena or policy issues or compendia on new teaching/education/ administration matters.
   Mason and her associates (2002) served as editors for Policy & Politics in Nursing and Health Care, one of the first books to have this focus. Although this first edition is almost 20 years old, it is still widely quoted from and is an excellent source for historical issues. Each chapter stands alone and is written by experts in their fields.
   An example is a chapter written by Beverly Malone (when she was the CEO of the Royal College of Nurs- ing, London) and me, titled “Managed Care and Men- tal Health: A Mixture of Optimism and Caution” (Malone & Smoyak, 2002). In retrospect, we should have said more about the “caution” part.
   Occasionally announcements about a book being planned are advertised via various professional social media. Topics and required expertise of contributors are listed.
   If you know the book editor, then a phone call or e-mail would be in order. If the editor is not known, then your response or proposal should be sent the way



that the announcement directs. Attaching not only your area of expertise or idea for a chapter but also a one-page, abbreviated curriculum vitae (CV) is a good idea. ftis short CV should highlight your areas of expertise and note any recent works of yours that have been published. Be sure to include an e-mail address that you check daily as well as a cell phone number.

Journal Articles (Refereed and Non-Refereed)
Writing articles for journals requires the greatest skill and expertise or experience.
1. Identifying your audience is the first step. To whom are you writing? Are they novices or expert clini- cians? Are they associate, baccalaureate, or master’s and above prepared?
2. Are you writing about what is new to you alone (you have just discovered this), or is the topic or issue new to others, too? In order to answer this question, a thorough search of the literature must be done. fte first question that journal editors ask is: “What’s new?”
3. How will you select the journal to which you will submit your article? Searching the literature to an- swer the point in the second item above will also lead you to the journals whose domain is yours.
4. What does the selected journal require for sub- missions? Guidelines for authors appear in journal Web sites and are occasionally printed in hard copy. ftese guidelines are very detailed; authors would do well to become familiar with all their rules and requirements. More is said about this topic in the section “fte Formal Review Process” and about the role of editors.

Books
ftere is a very wide variety of books. fteir domains, formats, length, authorship (solo author, edited), and so on, differ considerably. ftis is not an avenue to which a novice author might aspire. fte exception is that the research undertaken for a PhD might lend itself to becoming a book. For instance, years ago Carol Ger- main studied cancer wards and how patients, families,

physicians, and professional staff interacted. Her book, The Cancer Unit (1979), was highly acclaimed and is still used as a resource today.

Editorials
fte majority of nursing journals publish editorials in each issue, whether the journal is published monthly or less frequently. Usually the editorial is written by the editor-in-chief, but sometimes it is delegated to a guest. Editorials also appear in newsletters and newspapers.
   fte following are the most common formats for ed- itorials: (a) ftey may simply “point” to what is in the current issue, making note of the importance of the top- ics and articles. (b) ftey may give a scholarly opinion about issues facing the profession. (c) Similar to (b) is an editorial suggesting questions that should be asked but have not been covered by the press. (d) ftere may be an interpretation of facts about current findings, reports, and literature. (e) fte editor may ask: “What’s right, and what’s wrong?” in the lay press about how health care is addressed.
   Recent editorials I have written focus on a few of the previously noted points. In one editorial (Smoyak, 2016a), I asked whether our readers considered them- selves to be coddlers or challengers. fte impetus for this topic was the unfortunate new expectation that students should be protected against intrusions into their personal comfort. In another (Smoyak, 2016c), I asked: “What’s in a name?” fte new alphabet soup was the topic, and readers were asked how familiar each of the new designa- tions was to them.

PREPARATION FOR DOING THE WRITING WORK


fte previous section lists the types of approaches you might take when considering in what venue to write. ftis section provides some preliminary steps to take as you prepare to become an author.

Step One: Get Organized
Gather your data, ideas, vignettes, case examples, notes about opinions, and other material in a filing system



that works for you. Younger folks are more committed to digital files and folders into which they put their own documents as well as PDFs of articles to which they might refer, news reports of interest, or other graphics that might be used at a future point. Older folks, such as me, prefer the old-fashioned three-cut file folders that can be labeled and then put into large accordion folders. My current folders are titled Nurse-Physician Debate/ Dialogue; Coddling or Challenging; Electronic Files and Health Records; Ethics of Publishing. Flip through the contents of your folders every few weeks to be reminded of your interests and what you have collected.

Step Two: Sort Out the Following Areas or Questions
As previously mentioned, you need to be in touch with what you have just discovered, but is it something that others already know about? If this item is new, how has it been covered in the recent literature?
   From the literature, what are the recurring issues that we should be thinking about or studying? Hand in hand with these suggestions, of course, is the fact that reading widely is mandatory. Reading should include worldwide news beyond health care. Coverage on TV or various news clips is not sufficient to tell the whole story, nor to get both sides of a story. Often, of course, there are more than two sides with opposing sides being divided into further, nested subcategories.

Step Three: Use Expository Style
Practice daily, writing marvelous, complete, engaging sentences. Putting words around observations is a good way to begin. In my folders, I collect great sentences that others have written. From an unknown source, there is: “Eschew obfuscatory scrivenry!” (Avoid convoluted writing.) ftis would be a fine sign to place above your computer.
   Aim to be clear and explicit rather than vague and ambiguous. Every controversial statement needs to be documented. Journal editors, including me, frequently query: How do you know that?
   Work on transitions between paragraphs. fte end of each paragraph should signal what will follow. fte entire document should have integrated paragraphs.

My best role model for such writing was Gerald Grob (1991, 1994), a Rutgers historian known worldwide for his analysis of mental hospitals and institutions and the patterns that patients endured over the years. Select books of his are in the online bibliography. If transitions are used between paragraphs, then readers can follow the main points from beginning to end.
   ftere should be no surprises. New ideas should not appear in the summary or conclusion.

Step Four: Know Your Resources
Become familiar with manuals of style, handbooks for writers, copyright law, expectations regarding reporting conflicts of interest, and how to assign the order of au- thors when there are more than one.
   A classic handbook is Strunk (2009) The Elements of Style. My favorite “how to” is William Zinsser’s On Writ- ing Well (1980). Among his marvelous sentences: “Clut- ter is the disease of American writing. We are a society strangling in unnecessary words, circular constructions, pompous frills and meaningless jargon” (p. 7). ftere is never a need to use “utilize” or “utilization” when “use” will do.
   Annette Flanagin is the lead editor of the AMA Manual of Style: A Guide for Author and Editors, 11th ed. (2020). More than a decade ago, Flanagin took over as editor of the AMA, and along with an entire net- work of co-editors, she has added extensive sections to the manual, including 23 chapters with subheads. She has presented workshops at the International Academy of Nursing Editors (INANE) on conflicts between ed- itors and potential authors, disputes between multiple authors over who should be acknowledged as the lead, and the responsibility and consequences for withdraw- ing manuscripts from consideration after feedback for improvement has been offered.
fte AMA Manual’s  first chapter augments points
made earlier in this chapter about the types of articles. fte second chapter focuses on preparing manuscripts for submission. For new authors, the chapters on the impor- tance of references and ethical/legal considerations are very valuable, and the 1,227-page manual is well indexed. Although Strunk’s handbook on style is still an impor- tant resource, the AMA Manual has expanded chapters
on grammar, punctuation, plurals, and capitalization.



   An Academy Health (2015) publication suggests re- sources for researchers seeking to publish public health services and systems research (PHSSR) in peer-reviewed literature. For APNs, this publication is a guide for find- ing which sources publish which types of articles. It in- cludes an appendix that lists specific journals, their foci, examples of articles published, and how quickly submit- ted manuscripts might be reviewed.

Step Five and Beyond
Get rid of the belief, if you harbor it, that your first draft will be perfect with no revisions needed. Abraham Lincoln’s famous: “Forgive me, I did not have time to make this brief,” illustrates that clear, succinct writing requires time to analyze, rewrite, and revise. ftink in terms of drafts, not final products. Ask colleagues to read your drafts and to make suggestions for improvement. Resist the urge to be defensive; rather, consider their suggestions seriously.

Not a Step: Query Letters
Novice authors sometimes believe that writing a query letter to the editor of a journal to which they wish to submit an article is a good idea. It is not. Any ques- tion can be answered by consulting the “Guidelines for Authors” or reading several issues of the proposed jour- nal. Asking an editor if a proposed topic is of interest is a waste of the editor’s time when the editor does not know how well you write, what literature you have searched, or what your plan is. If anything, you will get a standard, boilerplate response such as, “Without further informa- tion, I cannot answer your query.”
   fte consensus among editors of nursing journals is that the bad advice to write query letters comes mostly from nursing faculty. We know that faculty assign grad- uate students the task of writing a query letter as part of a course. We also have a suspicion that these faculty members are not published authors themselves. Students should be wary about those from whom they receive such advice. My advice is that you ask any faculty member making such an assignment to show you a query letter they have written and ask to see the response. ften, be sure to examine that faculty member’s CV for published articles in refereed journals. Unfortunately, this bad ad- vice also appears in books and articles about writing.

REVIEWING THE LITERATURE


A careful and thorough review of the literature will an- swer two questions: (1) What is it that I should know? and (2) How will I know what’s fact or fiction, opinion or science, and how writers derived their sources?
   Evidence-based practice is the expectation today not only for clinical matters but also for administration, management, and teaching. Evidence-based practice and science are closely intertwined but are not the same. In a presentation to editors of nursing journals, Goldacre (Smoyak, 2016b) challenged us to do better at reporting science. Using his book, Bad Science (2008), he provided definitions and illustrations of accurate, evidence-based practice and good science, showing how a great many of supposedly scientific articles about health care are seri- ously flawed.
   Bad science is ignoring the consensus built by re- searchers about how to conduct a proper study. Goldacre provides gentle reminders about the processes that sci- entists must execute in order to test theories adequately and publish them fully. He documents the wrongs per- petuated when only positive or significant findings are reported and promotes evidence-based health care built on science, not opinion or hearsay. ftis reader-friendly book can serve as a reminder about the steps in research and how reports should be written.
   Goldacre’s second book, Bad Pharma (2012), is a more in-depth documentation of problems in medicine, particularly missing trials. When randomized clinical trials (RCT) that could have easily been done are not, shoddy shortcuts and misrepresentations about the data occur regularly. In the process of documenting poor re- search designs, Goldacre provides very clear short lessons and reminders about what good science is. You would do well to place this book on your “must read” list.
   Goldacre’s third book (2014), I Think You’ll Find It’s a Bit More Complicated Than That, is a good illustration of how alternative paths may lead to a book. ftis book is a collection of his columns published in newspapers and journals and papers delivered at conferences and conven- tions. Beyond being an author, Goldacre is a broadcaster and an entertainer, so these pages are filled with stories that have delighted audiences and produced gales of laughter.
   Goldacre’s nearly 400 pages are arranged as snip- pets from his columns and lectures. Each can be read



individually, selecting from the fascinating titles. ftese in- clude: “Kids Who Spot Bullshit, and the Adults Who Get Upset by It”; “fte Stigma Gene”; “A New and Interesting Form of Wrong”; and “Pornography in Hospitals.” My per- sonal favorite is “How Do You Know?” I make this query very often when I write to prospective authors, telling them that their manuscript needs serious revision. I am always amazed at the controversial statements potential authors make as if they were conclusive facts (Smoyak, 2016b).
   Revisiting your academic library is also a good idea. Librarians are excellent sources for how to access da- tabases; they all have their favorite search engines and methods and are quite willing to share them. Many of the larger libraries have an “Ask a librarian” feature, whereby you can e-mail your question but also set up face-to-face help appointments. Several times each semester, as a ser- vice to new faculty and students, librarians offer refresher courses that include topics such as selecting key words, using Boolean logic, and accessing articles or books for free from the cooperating network of academic libraries. Large hospital systems and other institutions (such as insurance agencies) frequently have arrangements with university libraries, allowing their employees to use the reference materials. Alumni associations also are a way
for former students to access academic libraries.
   Beyond the wealth of data and literature sources, many libraries also have their own version of reference management systems, such as End-Note. Depending on the library, a personal reference system that a person may have set up while a student can continue to be accessed after graduation. However, there may be time limits im- posed or fees attached.
   Databases are described in the text that follows, but university libraries are also grand sources beyond the specific systems mentioned. Exploring their home pages and what exists in the many drop-down menus yields a wealth of information options that can be accessed. Users need to become aware of the access rules. Cur- rent full-time faculty have the widest access options, but alumni can use these resources also.

Databases
fte two databases most frequently used by nurse writ- ers are MEDLINE (Medical Literature, Analysis and Retrieval System Online) and CINAHL (Cumulative

Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature). MEDLINE was developed originally in 1949 by the National Library of Medicine (NLM) and is continuously updated. fte National Center for Biotechnology Infor- mation (NCBI) is within NLM. Today, there are more than 20 million journal citations gleaned from more than 5,000 biomedical journals worldwide. Searches can be conducted via PubMed at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih
.gov/pubmed/. MeSH stands for Medical Subject Head- ings, but you may also use key words, authors, titles of journals, or publication dates. Depending on your access route and what your library has paid for, abstracts only may be available, but full text is also possible.
   CINAHL is more recent, beginning in 1961, and is a comprehensive database of nursing and allied health literature, whereas MEDLINE includes all biomedical sources. CINAHL indexes more than 3,000 journals; nearly 100 are full text. Digital access is via EBSCO, http://www.ebscohost.com/cinahl/.
fte Cochrane Collection is an international not-for
-profit organization of health professionals who also hold academic appointments. Sir Iain Chalmers is its founder. For more than 30 years, they have produced systematic summaries of the research literature on health-care stud- ies, many of them RCTs, as well as many meta-analyses. ftey also invite people to submit clinical questions that need answers to inform clinical practice. As Goldacre notes (2008), “ftis careful sifting of information has re- vealed huge gaps in knowledge . . . revealing that ‘best practices’ were sometimes murderously flawed, and sim- ply by sifting methodically through pre-existing data, it has saved more lives than you could possibly imagine” (p. 99). Goldacre provides an example. fte Cochrane Review examined deaths from any cause (230,000 cases) in all the placebo-controlled randomized trials on anti- oxidants. Some had very high doses but were in line with what could be purchased in health-food stores. “ftis (analysis) showed that overall, antioxidant vitamin pills do not reduce deaths, and in fact they may increase your chance of dying” (p. 107).
Another rich and complete source of clinical data
is https://www.guideline.gov, maintained by the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services as part of its Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). ftis system incorporates the National Guideline Clear- ing House (NGC), which directs the investigator to



clinical practice statements that include recommenda- tions to optimize care that are informed by a systematic review of evidence and an assessment of the benefits and harms of alternative care options. As previously noted, librarians can lead you to still other databases, depending on the topics and areas you are trying to review.
   As you are conducting a thorough review of the liter- ature on your given topic with selected key words, these references need to be catalogued. One way to do that is to create a chart, such as in Excel, with rows and col- umns. Each reference is on its own row and the column headers that you develop help you record important in- formation about each source, such as year of publication, number of subjects, type of article, and chief results. fte references may also be grouped as (a) opinions or consen- sus, (b) qualitative designs, (c) quantitative approaches,
(d) summaries of other reviews, or (e) systematic anal- yses. Color coding sources can indicate their potential usefulness for your work.
  fte references should also be placed in End-Note or another referencing system. Such systems are able to provide information in your citations that you may have missed, such as an author, city of publishing, proper name of publisher, and similar items. You also may se- lect the required documentation style, such as Chicago Manual of Style, Publication Manual of the American Psy- chological Association, or others. In whatever form you entered items for the citation, the system will order them correctly (including numeric use and upper/lower cases).

The Impact Factor
In order to address the question of how credible or im- portant a given journal is, the ftomson Corporation, using the Institute of Scientific Information (ISI), de- vised the Impact Factor. Broadly speaking, this factor measures the worth of a journal, using the number of times articles in it, over a certain time period, are cited by other authors in refereed journals. “Specifically, the Impact Factor for a given year is defined as the total number of citations received by the journal in that year to articles published over the previous two years, divided by the total number of citable items published by the journal in that two-year period” (Webb, 2008, p. 18).
Most nursing journals do not yet have Impact Fac-
tors. To gain inclusion into the ISI database, journals

must be invited to submit their proposals, and then a vetting process begins. An ISI editor assesses the pro- posal by examining the regularity of publication, profile of the editorial team, whether it is peer-reviewed, and whether its contents are relevant and topical. INANE has been very persuasive in getting ISI to include more nursing journals in their invited group.

THE FORMAL REVIEW PROCESS


Evaluative Questions
Both small (readership under 500) and large (thousands of subscribers) journals have reviewers use systematic questions when evaluating manuscripts. Although these questions have a degree of variability in their style and method, the questions in Box 23.1 are asked by most



Systematic Questions for Evaluating Manuscripts1. Are there new ideas or a new look at old ideas or information?
2. Is the writing clear and reader-friendly?
3. Are the references relevant and up to date? Are important references missing?
4. Is there evidence to support conclusions, clin- ical interventions, or recommendations?
5. Are the sources for the evidence indicated as the author’s own or from the literature?
6. Are clinical implications clear, practical, and useful?
7. If relevant, is the cost indicated? Who pays for what and how?
8. If this is a research report, are the methods clearly and adequately described (sample, in- struments, design, analysis)?
9. If tables and charts are included, are they complete and clear?
10. If the manuscript is credible and well-written, would it be more appropriate for another journal?


reviewers. ftese questions would be a good checklist for you to use as you evaluate your drafts.
   Some journals use a yes/no format for these questions, whereas others use a Likert scale of some type. ftere is usually space allocated for the reviewer to suggest addi- tional points, in a narrative format, to the editor-in-chief.

Types of Decisions
After an article has been reviewed, what feedback are you likely to receive? Again, there is variability in how reviewers are asked for their “bottom line” or what their final suggested decision is. fte most common examples are these:
• Accept, revise, reject
• Revise—but an indication that this might be a reject
• Poor, average, excellent
• A numeric scale with high and low indicated

Required Disclosures
Authors are required to indicate what role they played in writing the manuscript, to acknowledge that they un- derstand what is meant by copyright, and to state any potential conflicts of interest. Each of these points is cov- ered in the text that follows.
Author’s Role
Authors must indicate what part they played in the writ- ing: (a) conception and design, (b) data collection, or
(c) analysis and interpretation. Also, did they (a) actually write the manuscript, or (b) critically revise the man- uscript? Although not mandatory, they are also often asked about (a) statistical expertise, (b) obtaining fund- ing, (c) administrative, technical, or material support, or
(d) supervision.
Copyright
A copyright transmittal statement is required. For Slack publications, the language is this: “In consideration of Slack, Incorporated taking action in reviewing my (our) manuscript, the author undersigned hereby transfers, as- signs, or otherwise conveys copyright ownership of the text and any accompanying images (including video) to Slack, Incorporated in the event that said work is pub- lished by Slack, Incorporated” (Slack, 2011).
  
fte statement goes on to define worldwide rights; print, electronic, and Web formats and what is meant by collective formats; and asks whether the author is a fed- eral employee. Signatures are required of solo and group authors. Bear in mind that copyright refers to printed words, not the ideas or plans that authors may have that are not yet committed to print. Owners of journals de- termine the methods by which published articles may be shared.
   Copyright has been the traditional means by which publishers ensure that their printed material is safe from various kinds of theft. However, some publishers now allow the signing of an Exclusive License Form, the gen- eral purpose being that the author retains copyright, but that the publisher is given “Exclusive License” to publish the author’s material (Webb, 2008).
Form for Disclosure
Most journals use the International Committee of Med- ical Journal Editors (ICMJE) form for disclosure. ftis multipage form has four parts: (1) identifying informa- tion, (2) the work under consideration for publication,
(3) relevant financial activities outside the submitted work, and (4) other relationships. For the second sec- tion, questions include whether payment or an honorar- ium was received, whether there was grant support, if writing assistance or administrative support occurred, or whether or not travel was supported. Under the third sec- tion, questions include board membership, consultancy, expert testimony, or fees for lectures (ICMJE, n.d.).

Who’s Who?
Larger journals have both a panel for new reviewers and people designated as “reviewer,” who are more senior folks. fte reviewers sometimes constitute a “board of review,” which generally means that they are expected to write articles themselves as well as to solicit manuscripts from others. Members of the board of review may be expected to write editorials, suggest new columns and directions, and attend board meetings. Both panels and reviewers represent specialties; geographic areas; and do- mains such as academics, administrators, managers, cli- nicians, and consultants.
   Very large journals sometimes have panels with hundreds of reviewers, each with a designated area of



expertise. ftis group is called upon only when the editor needs a content expert or a research or statistics expert. Some may be called on once a year or less often. fteir names are not usually listed on the masthead.
   fte “inside” editor is an employee of the publisher who has expert editorial credentials. ftis editor may have a staff of additional copy editors, graphic artists, and so on. fte “outside” editor is the editor-in-chief, se- lected by the publisher to head a journal. Terms of office may be designated or not. How they are paid is propri- etary information.
   Panel members and full reviewers are selected sim- ilarly. ftey are expected to be experts in their clinical field or specialty or to be acknowledged for their admin- istrative, management, or teaching skills. Journals whose mission is reporting research must have a track record of funded and published studies. ftey generally come from wide geographic areas in the United States and may come from other countries.
   Full reviewers are generally more experienced and have considerably more published articles in refereed journals. ftey may also have served on other editorial boards or been a reviewer for association publications, such as newsletters and monographs. fte quality of their review is expected to be stellar, and they are expected to be contributing authors. A large part of their role is to solicit manuscripts for submission and to make sugges- tions for quality improvement in all areas, such as new columns. Frequently, they are expected to submit at least an editorial from time to time.
   Most editors-in-chief keep some type of report card for both panel and full review members. ftese are shared individually, sometimes in face-to-face sessions at meetings.
   fte final decision about a submitted manuscript is made by the editor-in-chief. Because reviewers are so di- verse in their backgrounds and expertise domains, it is not unusual for three reviewers to have three different evaluations: one accept, one reject, and another revise. It is the editor’s role to consider all three very carefully and then make a judgment about the final outcome.
   Ideally, the editor then composes a letter to the po- tential author relaying the decision, along with the rea- sons for it. For instance, if the decision is to reject, then the letter must be very clear and exact so that the poten- tial author does not misconstrue what is being said as

“revise.” If the decision is to revise, very explicit, num- bered points must be made and the author(s) told to use this numeric system when responding. If the article has more than one author, one of them is designated to com- municate with the editor. If the decision is to accept the manuscript, some minor revisions may be needed.
   Very occasionally, a potential author might disagree totally or in part with the editor’s decision. If the objec- tion is that the decision should not have been a reject, the editor may reach out and suggest a telephone call. If the decision is to revise and the author does not want to do what is suggested, then the decision may shift to reject.
   When I encounter authors with an air of defensive- ness, I always point out the following:
a. Editors are your best friends. ftey want to help you to improve your writing, not just criticize or dis- mantle it.
b. Editors will never become your co-authors. ftey work only behind the scenes.
c. If you disagree with what the editors are saying, take care to be thorough and explicit about your objections.

OPEN ACCESS


According to the Budapest Open Access Initiative (OA, 2002): “By ‘open access’ to this literature we mean its free availability on the public Internet, permitting any users to read, download, copy, distribute, print, search, or link to the full text of these articles, crawl them for indexing, pass them as data to software, or use them for any other lawful purpose, without financial, legal, or technical bar- riers other than those inseparable from gaining access to the Internet itself.” OA can be accessed at http://www
.budapestopenaccessinitiative.org/read.

Types of Open Access
OA may be classified as either gold or green. Gold OA occurs when authors publish in an OA journal that pro- vides immediate free access to all its articles on the pub- lisher’s Web site. Hybrid OA journals provide gold OA only for those individual articles for which their authors (or their author’s institution or funder) pay an OA pub- lishing fee.



   Green OA, also known as self-archiving, occurs when authors publish in any journal and then self-archive a version of the article for free public use in their in- stitutional repository, in a central repository (such as PubMed Central), or on some other OA Web site (such as a subject-specific one).

Why Open Access?
Usually authors seek OA to their work for one of two reasons: (1) ftey personally want the article to be freely available on the open Internet, or (2) their funder has specified that the article must be made freely available on the open Internet. NIH is such an organization. ftis is not to be confused with copyright restrictions (see the section that follows on plagiarism) or public domain availability, which may occur when a copyright has lapsed or when no restrictions govern the document, such as occurs with many government publications.

PLAGIARISM

Plagiarism is essentially theft of someone else’s words, documents, or materials that have been published. It is a crime of theft of intellectual property. Plagiarism occurs whenever an author fails to acknowledge the source of words, phrases, or entire paragraphs, charts, or tables. Adequate and appropriate documentation needs to be provided for any printed material that is not the author’s own. Another version of plagiarism occurs when authors use words or statements that they have made in other published work but do not provide the citation or refer- ence. ftis is “self-plagiarism.”
   If exact words or statements are borrowed, these need to be placed within quotation marks and the page number(s) given. If graphs or tables are borrowed, there must be a statement from the publisher of this work that such a copying has been permitted. ftis permission, of course, must be in writing.
   Cross-referencing is the term used when editors hire outside sources to check for plagiarism. One system is CrossRef’s Similarity Check, which can be used for all submissions to a journal, or the editor might select only those about which there is a question. Some reviewers have asked journal editors to purchase such systems if

they are not in a university setting that has already made a blanket purchase. ftere is agreement about the impor- tance of being able to identify content-similarity issues that may signal plagiarism. CrossRef can upload every manuscript and have them checked against a growing database of millions of published papers by 800+ pub- lishers. “Flagged” papers are sent to the editors with notes. Editors determine potential barriers to publica- tion, recognizing that a certain level of self-plagiarism might be acceptable.

WORKSHOPS FOR WRITING


Buyer beware!! Before registering to participate in a writ- ing workshop, make sure you know the credentials of the presenter. You might want to refer to the previously mentioned Who’s Who.
   If the presenter’s plan is to give specific feedback about drafts of manuscripts, then the authors need to know in what form this will happen. Will the manu- script be projected in some way and comments made to statements? Or will the courtesy review be private? Will this happen during the convention or workshop time, or afterward?
   During Q & A periods, a question I am frequently asked is whether I ever do or did ghost-writing. My an- swer is “Yes.” If I am then asked if that doesn’t bother me, if what I have written is a grant that a dean submits or a report to the president that is forwarded from the dean’s council, I say “No.” I explain that my background is having written for a squirrel. When I was in elementary school, a teacher asked if I wanted to develop and write a column for the broadcaster at the Samuel E. Shull School. I thought a bit—and then offered, “I want to write as if I were the school’s mascot, Squiffer E. Squirrel.” fte teacher was a bit surprised but gave me free reign. My first column was about what Squiffer saw in the teachers’ lounge when he visited there. Teachers were smoking!! Of course, in those days, teachers were allowed to do this, but many of the students did not know that the teachers smoked, nor that they ate lots of candy and sweets. I owe a big tribute to my teacher, Miss Drysdale, who did not alter what I wrote. And, after some chagrin, the teachers laughed.
So—if I can write for a squirrel, writing for a dean is
no problem.



SHARING WHAT’S IN MY FOLDER

At the top of one of my folders, which is marked “In- spiration,” are the following sentences by John Gardner (1959), speaking about excellence:
An excellent plumber is infinitely more admirable than an incompetent philosopher. fte society which

scorns excellent plumbing because plumbing is a humble activity, and tolerates shoddiness in philos- ophy because it is an exalted activity, will have nei- ther good plumbing nor good philosophy. Neither its pipes nor its theories will hold water.
   I hope you are inspired to learn and daily practice the writer’s craft.

UNIT 
4
Ethical, Legal,
and Business Acumen





























405


















Measuring Advanced Practice Nurse Performance
Outcome Indicators, Models of Evaluation, and the Issue of Value
Shirley Girouard, Patricia DiFusco, and Joseph Jennas



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Describe the value, quality, and accountability context surrounding advanced practice nurse (APN) practice.
• Understand APN performance expectations in general and those specific to
specialty practice.
• Develop quality and performance measures for use in practice at the individual, group, systems, and societal levels.
• Demonstrate the ability to design a model for assessing structures, processes, and
outcomes within a framework of national standards.
• Plan actions to enhance the APN impact in patient care, education, research, administration, and advocacy or policy.






407



INTRODUCTION

fte 2020 International Year of the Nurse and Mid- wife promised to be auspicious—a time to recognize and celebrate the past, present, and future of the nurs- ing profession. Indeed, nurses were recognized and celebrated—although not how we expected to be. fte dominant issue and concern for all sectors of society was, of course, the COVID-19 pandemic. Life changed dramatically for everyone, challenging both health-care providers and the health-care system. Compounding the challenges of the pandemic itself were a number of envi- ronmental, social, economic, and political issues. Devas- tating fires and weather events in the United States and other countries and climate change are compromising health and well-being around the world. Social issues like racial injustice and health and wealth disparities must be addressed. Economically, the consequences of the pan- demic are deep and long lasting and have direct and in- direct impacts on health and health care. Finally, political and cultural divisiveness impedes our ability to plan and implement effective responses to all the other problems. In addition to the obvious direct impact that COVID-19 has had on health, the repercussions of restricted access to health prevention and promotion, disease management, diagnosis and treatment, and men- tal health services are profound. ftese challenges take place in the context of cybersecurity concerns, the opioid crisis, the politicization of health and health care, and mistrust of science among large segments of the pub- lic. As we seek to practice from an evidence base, only 32% of U.S. adults (Funk, 2020) agree that scientists provide fair and accurate information. Truly, 2020 was a year of rapid change and turmoil in the organization, de- livery, and financing of health care. Overwhelmed with patients with COVID-19 and lacking personal protec- tive equipment (PPE), health-care providers scrambled to find innovative ways to provide safe care for patients with other health-care needs. fte need for leadership and accountability in health care has never been so great.

Demands on Today’s APN
It is within this context that the APN is challenged to provide high-quality, cost-effective care to individuals, groups, and the community. Accountability, through

performance measurement, is ubiquitous and even more complex than ever before. APNs, along with other indi- viduals and organizations, must demonstrate that their performance enhances the quadruple aims of
• Improving care experiences for patients and families
• Improving the health of populations
• Reducing the per capita costs of health care
• Improving the clinical experience (of providers)
   As Whittington and colleagues (2015) suggest, these aims are an integral part of the U.S. strategy to improve health outcomes and health care. fte fourth aim was added to recognize the need to improve the work life of clinicians and staff. ftese aims provide a framework for state and federal initiatives and the agencies that creden- tial, accredit, and regulate the organization, delivery, and financing of health-care services.
   Consumerism and population health issues have garnered more attention through initiatives to increase quality of care for older adults such as Age-Friendly Health Systems (Fulmer et al., 2018) and World Health Organization (WHO) Baby-Friendly initiatives (2018) to foster breastfeeding. Hallmarks of this movement include engaging patients and communities in deci- sion making, engaging communities in practice and research at every level, and promoting communication and transparency of information (Carmen et al., 2019). Providers and health-care organizations are being asked to address social determinants of health, including rac- ism, as never before.
To improve care experiences, individual patients and
families are encouraged to become more engaged in care and to participate in planning and assuring that they receive quality, safe care. To improve outcomes for population health, providers and communities are expected to transform the organization and delivery of services. To reduce health-care costs, care providers and payers are engaged in payment reforms and developing more cost-effective interventions, and reimbursement structures are being modified. ftese aims are influ- enced by a number of trends related, in part, to the implementation of the Patient Protection and Afford- able Care Act (ACA) (Public Law [PL] 111-148) and subsequent policy and administrative changes. Trends and issues include increased access and, thus, more de- mand for services; drug pricing; mergers of providers,



organizations, and insurers; technologies such as tele- health and mobile apps; and data security (Blumenthal et al., 2015; Lorenzetti, 2015). Superimposed on all of these changes—and influencing them—are political and power issues.
   Given the demands facing the health-care system, both the voice of nurses and the leadership of APNs are essential to meet our professional and societal ob- ligations to improve health and health care. APNs are uniquely positioned to contribute critical knowl- edge, skills, and attitudes as well as their values of civic professionalism and compassion to political and decision-making dialogues. fte purpose of the health- care system is to continuously reduce the impact and burden of illness, injury, and disability and to improve the health and functioning of the people of the United States. Although providing direct care and influencing the direct care provided by others are necessary work and contribute to meeting this goal, they are not suffi- cient to meet growing professional and societal quality and accountability demands. By demonstrating their contributions; continuously improving their perfor- mance; and being accountable to the profession, em- ployers, and the public for all components of their role, APNs can make a difference.
As the nurse moves from novice to expert, respon-
sibility for and accountability to self and others for the structures, processes, and outcomes of health care in- crease proportionally. Achieving the status of APN is not a terminal event, and the role assumes ongoing and increasing professional and societal obligations. Respon- sibility for meeting the quadruple aims means that the APN must serve the profession and society as a primary agent contributing at the level of individual care in the practice setting and at the tables where organizational and public policies are made and implemented. In ad- dition, the professional and societal trust afforded to the APN obliges meaningful contributions—beyond indi- vidual patient care—to meet the purpose of the health- care system. APNs must not only do good; they must demonstrate their value to society through performance assessment and its documentation and dissemination at every level of care and decision making so that their voices are heard. fte importance of APNs to health out- comes, the profession, and society cannot be underesti- mated or ignored.

The Case for Accountability
Why should APNs be concerned about these issues? Consider a Web search of the terms health care AND ac- countability that resulted in more than 136 million hits. ftis number reflects the importance of the issue in our society. fte search revealed that accountability for the quality and costs of health care—its value—are of inter- est to consumers, purchasers/payers, employers, insurers, the government, and professional provider organizations. Although the demand for accountability for the value of health care is not new, the growing complexity of and changes in the health-care system raise the issue to a level that cannot be denied or minimized. ftis demand re- quires the APN to measure and disseminate information on the value of their role. Nurses in advanced practice, like other providers and health-care system components, need knowledge and skills to assess and measure quality and to determine the costs of their services if they are to demonstrate their value. It is not enough to “do good”; the APN must demonstrate how “doing good” translates into improved outcomes and lower costs.
Accountability for practice has been and continues to
be embedded in APN standards, education, and position descriptions. As Buerhaus and Norman (2001) suggest, the improvement of health-care quality is an “authentic commitment” (p. 68) for all stakeholders and will shape how health-care services are delivered. Given the defini- tion of advanced practice and its role components, APNs must contribute to and lead broad efforts to improve quality. fteir actions in defining, measuring, and report- ing on their performance will determine their future and that of the health-care system. fte advanced practice framework includes patients, health care, nursing, and individual outcomes. ftus, the APN is accountable for performance in all of these domains.
ftese concepts and obligations are integral to the
graduate-level student. Prepared at this level, the nurse is expected to have advanced role skills, possess refined analytical skills, operate from a broad-based perspective, have the ability to articulate views and positions, and connect theory and practice. fte master’s-prepared nurse is expected to engage in quality and safety initiatives and to collaborate interprofessionally to improve patient and population health outcomes. fte essentials for profes- sional nursing education are presently under revision,



and draft documents emphasize the role of the APN in evaluating individual and population health outcomes.

The Quality Context
If the health-care system is to reduce the effect and bur- den of illnesses, injuries, and disabilities and improve outcomes and functioning, all involved in the system must be responsible for identifying and improving the structures and processes for achieving positive outcomes. Research has shown that consumers and society are not getting what they want or need from the health-care system. fte Institute of Medicine (IOM, 1999, 2001) identified problems with the quality of care and safety concerns. In a study of consumer satisfaction with the health-care system, the Commonwealth Fund (Davis et al., 2002) found that patients were not satisfied with the quality of care they were receiving. Managed care, cost concerns, and the growing consumer movement in health care increased the demand for information about the value (quality in relation to cost) of health-care services and the performance of health-care providers in delivering quality, cost-effective services across all com- ponents of the health-care system.
Led by advocacy organizations, consumers are  de-
manding greater accountability from health-care pro- viders and the health-care system. ftey want quality, cost-effective services delivered from a patient-centered perspective. Federal and state government agencies and other purchasers want to know if the services they pay for are achieving the best possible outcomes at the best price. Organizations that accredit health-care organiza- tions are increasingly seeking evidence that the structures and processes of care produce positive health outcomes. All these demands to demonstrate and be account- able for value and cost-effective, high-quality care re- quire individuals and groups of providers to measure performance and share their assessments with stake- holders. Organizations such as the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA), the National Quality Forum (NQF), fte Joint Commission (TJC), and sev- eral agencies of the federal government lead efforts to measure and report on the quality of care provided by various health-care system components. Federal and state agencies, independently and in collaboration with private sector organizations, collect and disseminate

information about the quality of services provided by the health-care system’s various providers. Health-care “report cards” are mechanisms widely employed to address the concerns of consumers, payers, employers, and others about the quality of health care being pro- vided. Report cards are done for hospitals, health plans, and provider groups with the intent of informing con- sumers and improving quality.
   Public reports of health-care quality are done by state and federal governments and private sector organiza- tions. Implementation of the ACA resulted in greater reporting at the state and federal levels. Although the impact of these types of reports is not well known yet, they are likely to proliferate and be increasingly tied to reimbursement as reflected in the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services’s (CMS) efforts to tie reimburse- ment to outcomes of care.
   fte APN’s role includes accountability for patient and systems outcomes. ftus, the APN must measure performance in relation to the outcomes and effect im- provements. Assessing performance includes examin- ing the structures and processes of care provided by the APN. In addition, involvement to more broadly influ- ence the health-care system is an essential accountability component.

Values and Value in Health Care
To contribute effectively to fulfilling the purpose of the health-care system, the APN needs a clear vision derived from personal and professional values. fte APN needs to embrace society’s mandate for health-care value and clarify how the quality and cost issues relate to personal and professional goals. Explicit incorporation of quality and cost values and critical thinking about these issues will result in actions and activities consistent with social demand. fterefore, the APN role can be justified, and the needs of society will be better served. APNs will be well positioned to provide leadership in affecting qual- ity and costs, the “bottom line” of health-care system performance.
To be effective leaders and advocates for value issues
associated with patients and the role, the APN must know and appreciate what other stakeholders want. ftus, it will be easier to understand their behavior and thinking about health and health care and to develop



and implement strategies to address value conflicts, thereby resulting in better health-care outcomes. For ex- ample, the APN’s employer may value reducing costs to ensure organizational survival, whereas the APN’s high- est value is meeting the diverse needs of patients served by the organization. Negotiation, compromise, and col- laboration are necessary to incorporate both values into strategic planning efforts. Awareness of the importance of values, understanding the value equation, and pos- sessing the skills to address value conflicts are critical for APN survival and health-care system improvement. fte purposes of this chapter are to introduce APN students to quality frameworks, performance measure- ment, and accountability and to suggest approaches to address current issues and respond to trends. For the graduate APN, this chapter can enhance knowl- edge and skills that will promote the APN’s quality activities, better demonstrate accountability, and fos- ter actions to justify the role of the APN in meeting societal demands for quality, cost-effective health care. fte complexity of the quality movement and the value equation are discussed. As the health-care system be- comes increasingly complex, as stakeholders’ values and visions clash, and as there is growing dissatisfac- tion with the health-care system, APN leadership is critical. fte challenge to establish value and be ac- countable at all levels may appear daunting, but it is exciting and potentially rewarding for the APN, the
profession, and our society.

THE QUALITY ENVIRONMENT

Nursing, beginning with Florence Nightingale, has al- ways given attention to quality issues. Despite our his- torical roots as leaders in this area, the profession has drifted to a more internal, narrow perspective. Until recently, this narrowed focus mirrored the attention that our society gave to the quality of health care. In the United States especially, the values of individualism and self-determination, trust in science and technology, a disease and medical focus, the free-market economy, and nongovernmental interference shaped the structures and the processes of the health-care system, and thus influ- enced its outcomes. Access and cost issues have, until re- cently, received more attention than quality, particularly

at the societal level. As cost concerns increased and new delivery systems—such as managed care—were imple- mented, greater attention focused on quality and value. In addition, industry and quality theories and practices in business suggested that lessons learned in these arenas could be applied to the health-care sector.

Definitions and Frameworks
With greater attention being given to quality, long- standing terms and processes were dusted off and a new vocabulary evolved. As shown in Table 24.1, there are a plethora of terms used to describe quality concepts. fte APN, to operate effectively in the new health-care qual- ity climate, must be fluent in the new language.
   One of the earliest conceptual frameworks to de- scribe quality was developed by Donabedian (1966). It is widely used by the nursing community and others in the health-care system as a way to identify the structural and process factors that affect outcomes. Hamric (1983, 1989) provides a model for APN patient care evaluation using Donabedian’s framework. Girouard (2000) identi- fies structural elements that include the APN’s education, the time the APN spends in role components, reimburse- ment levels, and organizational characteristics. Process elements include APN behaviors, referral patterns, pre- scriptive practice behavior, collaboration, and APN sat- isfaction. fte outcomes related to APN structures and processes include mortality, morbidity, patient knowl- edge, patient satisfaction, service use, and health status.
Quality of care can be viewed from micro or macro
perspectives. At the micro level, quality is conceptualized and assessed for the patient, the provider, or the institu- tion. Clinical and technical care, satisfaction with care, and quality of life represent components of a micro view. Although always an important component of any quality approach, increasing attention is being given to the macro level—looking at outcomes and cost-effectiveness for populations and society. Examples include the efforts of private sector organizations such as TJC, NQF, NCQA, and private foundations. State and federal legislatures and the agencies implementing public policy decisions are also involved in macro-level quality approaches.
fte Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Ini-
tiative (CAHMI), in collaboration with consumers, de- veloped an experience of care framework and measures


   Table 24.1	
The Vocabulary of Quality

AccessAbility to obtain care or health and related services (also defined as use or insurance coverage)AccountabilityThe demonstration of value (e.g., quality care, patient satisfaction, resource efficiency, and ethical practice); liability for actionsCostTo the individual paying for services; to the provider to produce services; for societyOutcomeThe end result of structures and processes of care; the goal or objective of health and health carePerformanceAssessment of how individual providers behave; measurement assessment of processes of care; may be compared against standards or benchmarksProcessMethod in which health care is provided; provider behaviors; includes technical and interpersonal elementsQualityHow well services increase the chance for desired outcomes; knowledge based and evidenced basedQuality assessmentProcess of defining and measuring quality Quality assurance
Process of measurement and quality improvement; may also be defined as the minimum standards approachesQuality indicatorTrait or characteristic linked with evidence to desirable health outcomes; may serve as proxy for outcomeReport cardsCollection and reporting of performance and other quality-related data to the public or other targeted groupsStructureTools and resources for care (e.g., facilities, licensing and regulation, staffing, equipment)Total qualityIncludes an environment for quality, involves continuous measurement and improvement activities (often called total quality management or continuous quality improvement)


for children and adults. ftis framework and the measures developed to date are widely used by such organizations as the NCQA, the NQF, the IOM, and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation for measuring the quality of care provided to large population groups. In addition, federal government agencies, such as the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) and CMS, and state government agencies have adopted the framework and adapted the measures for a macro approach to quality.

Access, Cost, and Quality
fte growing demand for quality requires that attention also be given to access because improved health status and other outcomes of care depend on the individual’s

ability to receive needed services across the continuum of care. Although often discussed as an issue of access to insurance for the uninsured and the underinsured, a payment mechanism is not sufficient to improve out- comes. What providers, services, and goods individuals and groups have access to are major factors in achieving desired outcomes and cost efficiencies. ftus, payment levels, what is paid for, and who gets paid are import- ant access considerations in the quality equation. Well- known deficiencies currently exist in mental health-care services, oral health-care services, and nursing services (e.g., the cyclical nursing shortage). fte APN should pay particular attention to and justify the needs for and ben- efits resulting from advanced practice nursing services in all health-care settings and for all levels of care.



   Cost issues are the third component (along with ac- cess and quality) of the health-care system triangle and are essential to establish the value of health care. Cost can be considered from the perspective of the society at large—the total costs of health care, the percentage of national dollars for health-care expenditures. Global expenditures include provider services, insurance, goods and supplies, pharmaceuticals, research, education, core public health services, and institutional costs for deliver- ing health-care services. Consumers and employers are concerned about the direct costs of care. For employers, their insurance costs, loss of productive work time, and health-care program administration costs are considered as a percentage of expenditures needed to conduct their business. Individual consumers, although most often fo- cused on their out-of-pocket costs, are also concerned about the costs of insurance, the price of services and goods needed, and pharmaceutical costs. A third ap- proach when considering health-care costs is the per- spective of the health-care professional or health-care organization in which the focus is on expenditures, such as costs for personnel, administration, physical plants, and supplies and equipment to produce services for groups of patients.
To adequately assess quality at the individual, so-
cietal, or organizational level, APNs must be cogni- zant of access and cost issues and the role they play in determining outcomes. Access and cost issues reflect structural and process elements, the factors that influ- ence health-care outcomes. In addition, this approach holds opportunities for APNs to present themselves as a solution to access and cost concerns. ftus, APNs can make a strong case for the role’s value in the health- care system.

Recent Quality Initiatives
A growing number of national quality initiatives reflect the importance of this issue and support the assertion that quality efforts will remain a significant factor in shaping the future of the health-care system. fte iden- tification of standards and expected outcomes for ac- cess, costs, and quality; their measurement; and public dissemination and discourse are ongoing and expand- ing. To ensure quality and cost-effective care, quality must be defined; performance expectations specified;

and performance and outcomes measured. ftese are the bases for the quality efforts of national health-care organizations.
   Quality measurement is needed to understand the effects of services on individuals and populations and to make improvements in the organization, delivery, and financing of health care. According to the IOM’s National Health Care Quality Roundtable (Donaldson, 1999), health-care quality measurement objectives include the following:
• Gathering and analyzing data to inform quality im- provement efforts
• Assessing facility and individual performance in rela-
tion to established standards
• Comparing providers to inform purchaser and con- sumer choice of providers
• Informing all stakeholders about decisions and choices
• Identifying, rewarding, and sharing best practices
• Monitoring and reporting on quality over time
• Addressing the health-care needs of communities
   In response to the demand for quality, performance measurement, and accountability, federal and state governments and the private sector have taken action. Government agencies, with congressional policy direc- tion and as major purchasers of health-care services, need information about the quality of health care to guide policy and program decision making. Two gov- ernment agencies, the AHRQ and the CMS, are worthy of particular attention because quality is a major focus of their activities. fte AHRQ, through its internal and external research programs and educational initiatives, is charged to improve the outcomes and quality of health care. In addition, the AHRQ’s goals include improving patient safety, reducing errors, increasing access to effec- tive services, and reducing costs. As a major purchaser (Medicare and Medicaid), the CMS must ensure that its program beneficiaries receive quality, cost-effective care. In addition, through its regulatory functions it sets qual- ity standards for the health-care industry.
An example of a recent AHRQ initiative is a synthesis
of completed research to answer questions about which prescription drugs reduce costs and improve outcomes. fte AHRQ is also evaluating pilot projects that reward providers for delivering high-quality health-care services. ftey have disseminated a synthesis of studies so that



clinicians can make better decisions about treating pa- tients with community-acquired pneumonia. Clinicians will also find the AHRQ’s “Child Health Tool Box” and other collections of guidelines and measures useful in establishing their own performance measurement and quality programs. An exciting new initiative led by the AHRQ is the development of a national health-care quality report.
   Because Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries use a wide array of health-care services, CMS’s quality efforts are far reaching. Among its initiatives are programs to assess quality and performance in hospitals, home care, and long-term care. fte quality improvement system for managed care sets regulatory standards and guide- lines for quality assessment and improvement and health services management in managed care organizations (MCOs). To address quality in nursing homes, the CMS is assessing and disseminating information about quality in Medicare- and Medicaid-certified long-term care fa- cilities. ftrough the collection and analysis of uniform patient-level data (outcome and assessment information set [OASIS]), CMS is fostering outcome-based quality improvement in home health care.
fte initiatives described previously reflect only a few
of the federal government’s quality-related activities. Other Health and Human Services departments, such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB), are actively engaged in similar activities. State govern- ments are also involved in quality measurement and reporting. For example, New York, Florida, and Wash- ington are measuring provider performance in children’s health care.
   Private-sector organizations representing foundations, purchasers, employers, and professional organizations also measure and report on quality. Accrediting orga- nizations, such as TJC, are moving from assessing only structures and processes of care to outcome evaluation. For example, TJC-accredited organizations, through the ORYX initiative, are required to measure specific patient outcomes and provider performance standards. ORYX is TJC’s performance measurement and improvement initiative, first implemented in 1997. Safety, medical errors, and infection rates are also being used by TJC as performance indicators. ftrough an annual report on health-care quality in 271 MCOs, NCQA looks at plan

performance related to quality, access, and consumer satisfaction. NCQA’s health plan report cards are shared with employers and purchasing groups and are made available for consumer use in choosing health-care plans. ftree national organizations exemplify the private sector’s role in collaborating with government agencies to address quality: the CAHMI, the American Health Quality Association (AHQA), and the NQF. fte Foun- dation for Accountability (FACCT) was dedicated to help consumers make better decisions and choices by in- forming them about what to expect from the health-care system and by fostering their involvement in holding the health-care system accountable. fte CAHMI evaluates health system performance for children covered by Med- icaid and private insurance and reports on gaps in care
to consumers.
   fte AHQA represents professionals involved in qual- ity and CMS’s quality improvement organization (for- merly the peer review organizations) by implementing best practices and fostering quality improvement. By supplying providers and the public with regular updates on quality-of-care research, standards, and other related issues, they educate a wide audience of health-care sys- tem stakeholders. fte NQF, created in response to the President’s Commission on Quality in Health Care, states that its role is to develop and implement a national strategy for quality measurement and reporting. It uses its members and other experts to assess research and per- formance reports and provide guidance for improving health-care quality. For example, it issued a report that identified disparities in health care for minority popu- lations and suggested priority activities to address these disparities.
Employers are also involved in health-care quality
through their demand for information about quality and performance. Accountability is achieved through the measurement and reporting of performance mea- sures and through incentives for providers. For example, large employers in Massachusetts are offering bonuses to providers who improve the care of patients with diabetes and who use an electronic database to follow chronically ill patients.
   As these initiatives suggest, the APN’s performance is already being measured—directly as a primary care pro- vider and indirectly as a contributor to the health-care team’s performance. ftus, the APN must be aware of



national issues, trends, and approaches in quality mea- surement and improvement to guide practice and other professional activities. Later in this chapter, additional actions to be taken to participate more fully in the qual- ity movement are discussed.

ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSE
PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS

fte transition to the role of APN involves a steep learn- ing curve that recognizes the complexity of health care. APNs will be involved in aspects of health care, many of which were not often thought of as part of direct, day-to- day practice. Quality improvement and evidence-based practice (EBP) activities are being given much greater attention in all health-care settings. fte quality, safety, and performance measurement have grown exponen- tially in recent years as priorities in the health-care sys- tem. Quality in service is demanded by anyone seeking a service—this is especially true for health-care services. fte person receiving service, the organization providing the service, those paying for the service, and those regu- lating the service (and providers) are demanding perfor- mance assessment and accountability. fte APN, given the components and core competencies required of the role, is expected to be engaged in all aspects of the qual- ity and safety movement including the development, implementation, and evaluation of the performance measurement and reporting process.
As reflected in the licensure, accreditation, certifica-
tion, and education (LACE) discussion in the APRN Consensus Model (2008), quality and safety activities, assessment, and accountability are essential for all APNs. It is not sufficient for the APN to simply be aware of the quality improvement initiative and requirements; the APN must now be an active participant in the pro- cess. Most of the tasks that APNs will be completing in providing care to patients in this new role intersect with some aspect of the National Quality Strategy. fte National Quality Strategy, part of current health-care re- form initiatives, is the first policy to set national goals to improve the quality of health care. It serves as a guide for all HHS quality improvement programs and regu- lations and sets standard criteria to measure the quality of health and health care to align national quality and

safety efforts. APNs are responsible for meeting the de- mands of patient care while adhering to requirements that have emerged from this strategy.
   APNs must also be able to define quality in their own practice. Quality has many definitions, but there is consensus among researchers and policymakers that high-quality care is when providers give patients the right care when they need it, such as regularly mon- itoring chronic conditions to prevent complications. Similarly, quality care is appropriate and cost effective— patients do not receive unnecessary care, such as unnec- essary diagnostic tests or treatments. High-quality care is based on the best scientific evidence about what helps people get better and stay well, rather than on individual opinions or convenience. High-quality care is tailored to a patient’s preferences and values; it is accessible and re- liable for all and does not vary because of race, gender, income, or location. High-quality care means that pro- viders are respectful, communicate clearly, and involve patients in decisions about their care (Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 2012). Several IOM reports are also helpful (as discussed earlier in this chapter) in fram- ing and operationalizing quality definitions. Bunting and Groszkruger (2016), for example, offer an approach to using IOM recommendations to improve diagnostic activities.
fte IOM reports and subsequent quality initiatives
of federal and state agencies and private-sector organiza- tions have identified recommendations—most of which are currently in place—and recognized that a collabora- tive approach was needed to ensure health-care quality and safety. ftese recommendations included establish- ing agencies to focus on quality and safety; setting clear standards and expectations; peer review; protection of patient data; and adverse-event reporting systems. ftere are several activities resulting from these reports of inter- est to APNs. For example, in 2005, AHRQ launched its Patient Safety Network (PSNet), a national Web-based resource that maintains the latest patient-safety news and resources. In 2009, the CMS implemented Medicare Part C plan reporting requirements, which mandated the reporting of serious adverse events and hospital-acquired conditions. In 2011, the Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP), the Food and Drug Administration, TJC, and other organizations began promoting the use of “tall man” lettering to reduce confusion among



look-alike, sound-alike medications such as busPIRone– buPROPion and PENTobarbital–PHENobarbital.
  fte IOM (2011) identified six aims for quality im- provement helpful to APNs developing standards for their practice setting:
• Safe: Avoiding injuries to patients from the care that is intended to help them
• Timely: Reducing wait times and harmful delays for
both those who receive and those who give care
• Effective: Providing services based on scientific knowl- edge to all who could benefit and refraining from pro- viding services to those not likely to benefit
• Efficient: Avoiding waste, including waste of equip-
ment, supplies, ideas, and energy
• Equitable: Providing care that does not vary in quality because of personal characteristics
• Patient-centered: Providing care that is respectful
of and responsive to individual patient preferences, needs, and values and ensuring that patient values guide all clinical decisions.
   Standards for APN masters and doctoral nursing ed- ucation programs are found in Health Professions Edu- cation: A Bridge to Quality (IOM, 2003). ftese widely accepted recommendations called for major restructur- ing of health professionals’ education. All health profes- sionals should be prepared to deliver interprofessional, patient-centered care, practice from an evidence base, engage in quality improvement, and have informatics competency. Complex practice and delivery-system de- mands create a mandate to expand the clinical education and leadership capacity of APNs. APNs are expected to use advanced communication skills/processes to lead quality improvement and patient-safety initiatives in health-care systems (AHRQ, 2008). Similar standards and competencies are found in standards for APNs promulgated by the American Nurses Association and most nurse practitioner and specialty APN professional associations.
fte drive to measure quality is a concern for payers,
regulators, and, increasingly, consumers. As data systems evolve and payers insist on “paying for performance,” a level of accountability and transparency will be required regardless of provider type or health-care setting. To ad- dress the quadruple aims of the health-care system, the National Forum for Healthcare Quality  Measurement

and Reporting (2016) proposed six strategies to improve the individual care experience and population health while reducing cost:
• Making care safer by reducing harm caused in the de- livery of care
• Ensuring that each person and family is engaged as
partners in their care
• Promoting effective communication and coordina- tion of care
• Promoting the most effective prevention and treat-
ment practices for the leading causes of mortality, starting with cardiovascular disease
• Working with communities to promote wide use of
best practices to enable healthy living
• Making quality care more affordable for individuals, families, employers, governments, and communities by developing and spreading new health-care delivery models
   Clearly, professional expectations, such as those dis- cussed previously, embody quality and accountability ex- pectations for the APN in direct clinical care and within the health-care system. fte APN is expected to do good for patients, measure performance in relation to best practices, and be held accountable for practice. But that is not enough; APN expectations include quality-related issues that extend beyond direct clinical care to the health-care system and its quality and accountability issues.

MEASURING QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE


During the past several years, there have been significant efforts to define and measure performance, as reflected in the literature. APNs will find the literature helpful to begin the development of a professionally and per- sonally relevant framework to measure quality, evaluate performance, and identify meaningful indicators to jus- tify the role and fulfill the expectations of the role. fte structures, processes, and outcomes associated with APN practice can be evaluated at the individual practice level, for groups of providers and organizations, for care sys- tems (such as affordable care organizations and managed care organizations), and at the societal level. fte APN



should be knowledgeable about all of these approaches and involved at all levels. fte intensity of involvement at a given level varies with the position held, employer expectations, level of knowledge, skill in evaluation, and other demands. ftese levels are discussed in detail next.

Individual Level
APNs can assess their ability to meet the expectations for advanced practice by using the core competencies promulgated by the National Organization of Nurse Practitioner Faculties (NONPF) and the Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anesthesia Educational Pro- grams (COA). fte competencies are acquired through mentored patient care experiences with emphasis on in- dependent and interprofessional practice; analytic skills for evaluating and providing evidence-based, patient- centered care across settings; advanced knowledge of the health-care delivery system; patient safety; communica- tion; critical thinking; and leadership. Earlier versions of the nurse practitioner (NP) core competencies authored in 2002 and 2006 were applicable for master’s prepa- ration, and for the doctor of nursing practice (DNP) graduate as additive to the core competencies for the master’s graduate. As of 2012, there was one set of core competencies for entry into practice on graduation of NPs, regardless of whether preparation was in a master’s or DNP program (NONPF, 2012). However, in May 2018, NONPF committed to transition all entry-level nurse practitioner education to the DNP degree by 2025 (NONPF, 2018). In October 2019, the COA revised both its master’s and DNP program core competencies (COA, 2019). All students enrolled in an accredited nurse anesthesia program on January 1, 2022, and after, must be matriculated in a doctoral program.
Most APNs are probably already involved with di-
rectly measuring their individual performance. For ex- ample, annual performance reviews are a part of most employer–employee relationships. Generally, this type of evaluation focuses on the processes of care, productivity, and position description expectations. When outcomes, such as effectiveness of care, costs, or patient satisfaction with care, are measured by APNs, they generally apply to the individual’s work or program-specific goals. Recent quality and performance measurement approaches sug- gest opportunities for the APN to evaluate performance

more broadly and in other domains. For example, some state Medicaid programs are assessing their beneficia- ries’ experiences with care and providing feedback to individual providers. APNs can use such information to compare their care with that of other providers and with state norms, thus identifying areas for improvement. Al- though this information is infrequently directly shared with consumers, it continues to be more widely available.

Group Level
Evaluation of the structures, processes, and outcomes for groups of providers are a growing component of national initiatives to assess quality and performance. APNs may evaluate their practice as a group of APNs or in groups of diverse health-care providers. For example, certified nurse-midwives (CNMs) can join together to assess the costs, patient satisfaction, and birth outcomes associated with their practice. APNs in a family practice group that includes physicians can determine how their per- formance compares with that of other group practices. NCQA’s performance health plan measurement data can be abstracted to the provider group level and thus can be compared to national or state norms. fte hospital-based APN can participate in evaluating patient outcomes for specific populations of patients and in determining per- formance in relation to issues such as infection rates, an- tibiotic use, patient safety, and medication errors.
With the advent of setting- and group-specific data
collection, analysis, and reporting, opportunities exist for the APN to use findings from these reviews to de- velop and implement quality improvement in the prac- tice setting. For example, a geriatric nurse practitioner (NP) working with a long-term care facility can use the nursing home–specific reports generated by CMS to design programs to improve structures and processes of care related to specific outcomes. Findings of TJC can guide the hospital-based APN to identify goals for pa- tient care, developing processes for improvement, and assessing the effect of changes made.

Systems Level
Health-care plans, MCOs, and Medicaid programs are being evaluated and held accountable to consumers and purchasers of care for the quality they provide. As panel



or staff members in these health-care delivery systems, APN care is also being assessed. It is assumed that pur- chasers of care and consumers will use the information increasingly being made available to make purchasing decisions.
   fte Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS) Clinician and Group Surveys (CG-CAHPS) ask patients about their recent experi- ences with clinicians and their staff. ftese surveys, used by state Medicaid agencies, Medicare, NCQA, and oth- ers, ask consumers to report on their care in a number of domains. Survey questions ask about timeliness of care, appointment, and information; provider commu- nication and attention to mental and emotional health; support in taking care of own health; discuss medication decisions; and satisfaction with the provider. NCQA uses these tools and the Healthplan Employer Data and Information Set (HEDIS) to evaluate the quality of care in more than 90% of the nation’s health plans and PPOs. HEDIS data are obtained from administrative data sources and chart audits to assess effectiveness of care using indicators derived from research and expert opinion (AHRQ, 2016). fte HEDIS data help to calcu- late national performance statistics and benchmarks and to set standards for measures in NCQA Accreditation (NCQA, 2020).
State Medicaid programs use both CAHPS and
HEDIS to assess the performance of care provided to beneficiaries. In addition, a number of states are assessing the quality of children’s health-care ser- vices using tools such as those developed and tested by CAHMI. For example, one parent survey asks about providers’ ability to meet expectations related to promoting healthy development (PHD) in young children.
   CAHPS, HEDIS, and PHD measures, as well as other tools used to assess quality at the systems or health plan level, are evidence based, psychometrically tested, and widely endorsed by providers, consumers, and other stakeholders. Given the current demand for quality in- formation, these efforts are likely to grow in the future. APNs, as practitioners in most of these settings, should be familiar with the performance assessment measures used in their workplace and regularly review reports to continuously improve quality and meet national perfor- mance standards.

Societal Level
At the societal level, there are a number of existing and evolving approaches to assess the quality of the nation’s health-care system and its outcomes. Healthy People makes revisions according to the population and orga- nization information. Healthy People 2030 sets health outcome goals, identifies indicators to measure progress in achieving these goals, and lists structures and pro- cesses needed to meet the goals (Healthy People 2030, 2020). fte nation’s health quality is also being assessed by a number of private-sector organizations such as ad- vocacy and consumer groups and foundations. For ex- ample, the Commonwealth Fund’s goal is to promote a high-performing health-care system that achieves better access and improves quality and efficiency with emphasis on the most vulnerable populations: those having low incomes, those lacking insurance, and people of color (Commonwealth Fund, 2020).
Congress mandated that AHRQ produce an annual
report to the nation on health-care quality. Also, the AHRQ produces a national report on disparities in health care. fte National Healthcare Quality and Dis- parities Report (AHRQ, 2018) addressed six priorities: patient safety, person-centered care, care coordination, effective treatment, healthy living, and care affordability. fte report includes disparities in access to care, person-centered care, patient safety, healthy living, effec- tive treatment, care coordination, affordable care, race and ethnicity, income, insurance status, and residence location.
  fte Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI) promulgates health-care strategies that will reduce er- rors, waste, delay, and escalating cost (IHI, 2016). It also focuses on improvement capability, person-family centered care, patient safety, quality, cost, and value. In its third year of existence, the Triple Aim was created, which is a framework to maximize the performance of health systems by concentration on the health of a pop- ulation, the experience of care for individuals within that population, and the per capita cost of providing that care (IHI, 2020). fte Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation’s (APSF) mission is to continually improve “the safety of patients during anesthesia care” (APSF, 2020) through research, education, patient safety pro- grams, and campaigns. fte foundation identifies safety



initiatives and makes recommendations for implemen- tation with various organizations. It provides support and promotes a culture of anesthesia patient safety, knowledge, and learning. APSF also serves as an an- esthesia resource center for COVID-19 (APSF, 2020). In addition, APSF provides the platform for exchange of information nationally and internationally about the causes of and interventions to prevent anesthetic casualties.
   AHQR has a Patient Safety Organization (PSO) pro- gram with 94 organizations. Membership is voluntary, and organizations are required to adhere to the criteria set by the AHQR regarding the Patient Safety Rule. PSOs serve as repositories to which hospitals and all health-care providers can confidentially and voluntarily provide information that will be used for “the aggrega- tion and analysis of patient safety events” (AHQR-PSO, 2019).
  fte quality and performance measurement ap- proaches discussed previously represent a sample of the increasing number of activities in this area. fte next section of this chapter includes more detailed descrip- tions of these efforts, and the Recommendations section contains specific actions that the APN can take to par- ticipate at all levels. All are important to the APN to justify the role and to be accountable for meeting the expectations of society.
   Individual-level performance, especially when eval- uated using nonstandardized methodologies, provides information of value to only the APN and the em- ployer. Without comparative data, the APN’s perfor- mance cannot be assessed in relation to other providers; thus, it is more difficult to justify the role and identify APN contributions to outcomes. Individual-level per- formance evaluation may be necessary, but it is not suf- ficient to justify the role or its contributions to quality health care. When performance is assessed at the group, system, or societal level, especially when using standard, tested approaches, the APN is better positioned to jus- tify the role and demonstrate contributions to health- care outcomes. In addition, quality-improvement goals derived from these measurement efforts are those that are of greatest social value. However, doing only group-, system-, or societal-level evaluation means that APN-dependent performance may be more difficult to articulate.

APPROACHES AND MODELS
FOR PERFORMANCE EVALUATION


As APNs begin to evaluate performance, quality, and value, they need a framework to guide decision making and plan for effective and meaningful assessments of the role and its contributions. ftere are many approaches and models for the APN to consider. In choosing an approach to evaluation, the APN should assess the approaches and models in relation to their relevance and adaptability to meet the APN’s specific needs, justify the role, and mea- sure APN contributions to health and health care. fte goals of APN quality measurement are the following:
• Develop new and adopt existing data-collection methods relevant to the APN role.
• Establish APN competency and practice standards
aligned with facility, systems, and societal quality standards.
• Compare APN practice with that of other providers
and groups of providers.
• Improve performance based on evidence.
• Monitor and report quality over time to all stakeholders.
• Address community and societal health-care needs.
   Donabedian (1966) provides a basic framework for quality measurement at all levels. Although structures, processes, and outcomes of care can all be examined and used as quality indicators, it is important to provide ev- idence that measures of specific structures and processes are related to outcomes. In addition, outcomes chosen should be those of importance to health-care stakehold- ers. Selecting indicators that are of interest only to the APN does not serve to establish the role’s value or its contributions to meeting the purpose of health care and the health-care system. Studies of the relationship of nurse staffing or the APN (a structural measure) to pa- tient outcomes demonstrate how this can be done (Aiken et al., 2001, 2002; Needleman et al., 2002; Needleman & Minick, 2008; Pine et al., 2003; Simonson et al., 2007). fte researchers provide evidence for selection of the structural variables (nurse staffing and APNs) and for the relationship between nurse staffing and patient outcomes. fte importance of their work to a variety of stakeholders, such as TJC (2016) and the AHA (2016), is reflected in the media attention given to these studies.



Structure, Process, and Outcome Measures
Structural measures related to quality and specific to the APN role include characteristics of the APN (educa- tion, experience, legal aspects, and role expectations), the practice or organizational setting (group resources, or- ganizational structure, and provider relationships), and access to services (referral mechanisms, collaboration, and geographical location). Process measures focus on the nature of the APN’s interventions and interactions with patients. In current quality terminology, process and performance measures are synonymous. Process measures include the APN’s competence in diagnosis and management of health-care problems, prevention, teaching, and counseling; interpersonal aspects of care; and technical care (e.g., errors and medication misuse). Outcome measures reflect the results of structures and processes for individual patients, groups of patients, or society. Traditional quality outcome measures are mortality and morbidity. With increasing attention to assessing the quality of health care, patient experience or satisfaction with care, costs, and access are import- ant outcome measures. fte framework and evaluation models selected for use by the APN and the purpose and goals of the quality assessment process determine how the APN views patient satisfaction, costs, and access as indicators of quality.
A common model for measuring APN effectiveness
encompasses structures, processes, and outcomes. Struc- tural variables include legal issues and funding, organi- zation of care delivery, and use of the APN. Process and performance measures reflect the direct and indirect pa- tient care activities of the APN. fte model includes both short- and long-term outcomes. Short-term outcomes include accessibility, satisfaction, patient knowledge and health behaviors, and complications of care. Optimal health status, experience with care, morbidity, mortality, and costs of care are long-term indicators of quality.

Individual Level
Because APNs are involved in evaluating their own performance as a component of their organizational re- sponsibilities, approaches to this level of evaluation are important. In addition, individual-level performance processes can be designed to address evaluation needs

at the group and organizational, system, or societal lev- els. fte purpose of the individual evaluation is to as- sess APN achievement of competencies and to measure performance in meeting position or job description ex- pectations. fte APN works with peers, physician collab- orators, and supervisors to determine the specific factors to be assessed and to identify or design an evaluation methodology. Approaches to individual-level evalua- tion may include structures, processes, and outcomes. Hansen-Turton and colleagues (2013) examined the structural issue of MCO and health maintenance organi- zation (HMO) credentialing and found that 25% of NPs are not credentialed by HMOs. Other studies focusing on structure have looked at patient characteristics within APN practices, providing valuable information about the types of patients served (Hamric et al., 1999; Paine et al., 1999). Other APN-related structural variables studied include uses of technology (Borchers & Kee, 1999), identification of activities (Knaus et al., 1997), and the use of hospital data systems (Bozzo et al., 1998).
Satisfaction with APN care is a traditional part
of APN evaluation. Oermann and colleagues (2000) found that having access to CNMs was an important quality-of-care element for parents. Larrabee and asso- ciates (1997) found high levels of satisfaction with most aspects of APN care and used those areas with lower rat- ings to guide quality improvement efforts. Numerous other studies have demonstrated that patients and other providers are satisfied with the care delivered by APNs (Aquilino et al., 1999; Garvisan et al., 1998; McMullen, 1999). Instruments have been developed, and their psy- chometric properties tested, that can be useful to the APN in determining patient satisfaction with care (Cole et al., 1999).
Assessing the processes of APN care focuses on the
nature of the APN’s activities and interventions for di- rect patient care and their indirect patient care activities such as staff teaching and planning. Examples of instru- ments developed for this purpose include those of Gir- ouard and Spross (1983); Houston and Luquire (1991); Ingersoll (1988); Kearnes (1992); Oermann (1999); and Tierney and colleagues (1990), who studied consumer descriptions of quality of care and found that consumers believed quality nursing care meant having nurses who were competent and skilled and who communicated ef- fectively, conducted patient teaching, and demonstrated



caring behaviors. ftese elements of quality are consis- tent with other reports of consumer expectations and thus should be included in the APN’s measurement as indicators of care quality. Evaluation of these processes is important both for role justification and for the identifi- cation of nursing processes that affect quality outcomes. A number of studies have demonstrated APN contribu- tions to process indicators of quality (Bozzo et al., 1998; Diers & Bozzo, 1997; Diers et al., 1998; East & Colditz, 1996; Jacavone et al., 1999; Pelletier-Hibbert, 1998).
   APNs play a major role in the development, imple- mentation, and evaluation of practice guidelines, clinical protocols, and clinical pathways that guide the processes of care. NPs, for example, develop protocols for their col- laborative practices with physicians. APNs in hospitals, home care, long-term care, and other settings have leader- ship opportunities in this area as well. Examples in the lit- erature include the work of Card and colleagues (1998); Jacavone and colleagues (1999); Kee and Borchers (1998); McDaniel (1999); Morin and associates (1999); Musclow and colleagues (2002); and Sagehorn and asso- ciates (1999). APNs have also described and measured processes of care for a variety of patients (Barnason & Rasmussen, 2002; Beal & Philips, 1999; Brooten & Naylor, 1995; Coward, 1998; Strohschein et al., 1999).
Outcomes, the result of the APN’s clinical activities,
are the most meaningful components of the APN’s evalu- ation process. fte reference list for this chapter includes a number of studies that illustrate how APNs evaluated the effectiveness of their practice and outcomes. Additional studies described the costs and demonstrated the cost- effectiveness of APN practice (Burl et al., 1998; Dahle et al., 1998; Lombness, 1994; Walker et al., 1998). Studies linking structures, processes, and outcomes of APN care are particularly important to document APN effective- ness and to determine best practices for the organization and delivery of patient care services. For example, Rudy and colleagues (1998) examined relationships between staff type, activities of caregiving, and patient outcomes. Other examples of this type of evidence include the work of Mundinger and Kane (2000) comparing NP and phy- sician outcomes in primary care. (Additional examples, including the work of Aiken, Brooten, and others, are included in the reference list.)
Little information is available to describe the APN’s
contributions to achieving broad community-  or

societal-level health-care goals such as those in Healthy People (USDHHS, 2012). Although the effect of an in- dividual APN or even a group of APNs may be difficult to measure on such outcomes as health promotion and disease prevention, given the number of contributing factors, APNs should begin to identify how to address these most important societal outcomes. As national assessments of quality and outcomes are developed, the APN has an opportunity to begin to examine practice in relation to these evolving indicators. fte models for assessing health-care quality described in the following pages can be used to shape the APN’s quality and per- formance assessment goals, especially at the systems and societal levels.

Group, System, and Societal Levels
During the past several years, a number of organized ef- forts have been made to evaluate the quality of health care in the United States. Some are well established as evaluation models, although they are constantly being refined and updated. Other efforts are in earlier stages of development. ftere is significant consistency and col- laboration among all stakeholders to develop approaches and models that will better determine quality, measure performance, demonstrate value, and allow for health- care providers and systems to be held accountable. Nurses, including the APN, and organizations of nurses are increasingly involved in all phases of these activities. Some of the most promising and widely accepted ap- proaches are described to provide the APN with a broad view of current approaches and models.
Although the individual’s performance and the APN’s
care-related outcomes are important, they take on greater meaning when they can be compared. fte APN is en- couraged to participate in the development, testing, and use of standardized instruments to measure structures, processes, outcomes, and satisfaction with care to allow for comparisons. In the discussion of group, system, and societal measures that follows, it is clear that group- and system-level assessments will, in the near future, allow for individual provider tracking in relation to perfor- mance and outcomes of care. fte APN can use these data for individual performance assessments.
   One of the most widely used frameworks for qual- ity and performance measurement reflects the way



consumers think about their care (FACCT, 1999). fte categories of the framework are the following:
• The basics: satisfaction with the delivery of care by providers, access to care, and receipt of information and services
• Staying healthy: avoiding illness, health promotion
through preventive care, reduction of health risks, early detection of illness, and health education
• Getting better: appropriateness of treatment and
follow-up care to help recover from illness or injury
• Living with illness: self-care guidance, symptom control, avoidance of complications, and maintaining daily activities for people with chronic illness
• Changing needs: comprehensiveness of services, care-
giver support, and hospice care that helps individuals and families when needs change dramatically because of a severe disability or terminal illness
   Evidence-based measures are identified or new mea- sures are developed and field tested for each of the categories and are used as standards for accountability. FACCT’s framework is widely used by national accredit- ing organizations, such as NCQA and TJC, federal and state agencies, and others to measure quality and orga- nize quality reporting. For example, the Commonwealth Fund’s score card on health-care quality (2020) uses the FACCT framework to organize the information con- tained in the report.
   Another framework commonly used for quality and performance measurement is that put forward by the IOM (2001). Experts and a wide variety of health-care system stakeholders, including consumers, developed the framework. It includes six dimensions of quality: safety, effectiveness, equity, patient centeredness, efficacy, and timeliness. It, too, is a conceptual framework that guides other organizations and individuals in quality measure- ment, improvement, reporting, and research.
   fte Consumer Assessment of Health Plans (AHRQ, 2012) is a national quality-measurement initiative con- ducted by AHRQ through a number of research orga- nizations. It uses elements of the FACCT framework to organize survey questions designed to assess consumer experience with care. ftere are general surveys and surveys specific to special populations such as children and people with chronic conditions. CAHPS is used by NCQA and others as a standardized approach to provider

and health plan quality and performance measurement. fte Obama administration established Partnerships for Patients: Better Care, Lower Cost. ftis public–private partnership focuses on safety and reducing unnecessary hospital admissions (USDHHS, 2011).
   fte NCQA assesses and reports on the performance and quality of MCOs and health plans, including those that serve Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries in man- aged care plans. Both the FACCT and IOM conceptual frameworks are used by NCQA. Data are collected on individual providers and aggregated to the health or- ganization (plan) level. HEDIS and CAHPS serve as the measure sets for assessing quality and performance. HEDIS includes more than 60 evidence-based consen- sus measures of effectiveness of care. Measures such as immunization levels, breast and cervical cancer screen- ing, chlamydia screening, antidepressant medication management, post-coronary beta-blocker medication use and cholesterol management, comprehensive dia- betes care, hypertension control, follow-up after hospi- talization for mental illness, prenatal and postnatal care, and appropriate medication treatment for people with asthma are included in the data set (NCQA, 2011). fte HEDIS and CAHPS data are analyzed and reported publicly.
Another private-sector initiative addressing quality
and performance in the health-care system is the NQF (National Forum for Healthcare Quality Measurement and Reporting, 2016). NQF is a membership organi- zation representing a diverse group of public and pri- vate sector stakeholders, and its mission is to standardize quality-of-care performance measurement and reporting mechanisms. NQF has endorsed a list of procedures to promote patient safety; developed a framework for achieving their mission; and identified strategies to re- duce health-care disparities. Future plans include de- veloping sets of performance measures for hospitals, nursing homes, cancer care, and diabetes care. fte hos- pital performance measures are created using the IOM’s six domains of quality: safety, effectiveness, equity, pa- tient centeredness, efficacy, and timeliness.
Purchasers of care and the business community are
adopting existing quality and performance measure- ment models and assessment methodologies to meet their needs to determine the value of the health care they purchase. For  example, a Minnesota coalition of large



purchasers, the Buyers Health Care Action Group, as- sesses quality to increase value, choice, and health-care accountability. fte National Business Coalition has strategies to improve patient safety and reduce medical errors by fostering consumer awareness; promoting the use of standardized measurement and reporting; reward- ing quality; and supporting and using contract standards for safety. Many business coalitions, employers, and pur- chasers use data from national organizations such as the NCQA to improve their and their employees’ ability to make better health plan choices and to hold health plans accountable.
As the major accrediting organization for hospitals,
TJC has a long history of assessing structures and pro- cesses of care. During the past several years, and with the introduction of ORYX (a performance and outcome measurement program), TJC has moved toward out- comes assessment. Patient safety, including medication errors and infection rates, are receiving greater attention as quality indicators. Nurses involved in the develop- ment and testing of models to improve access quality are also an important consideration. For example, patient satisfaction with hospital care was addressed by Dozier and colleagues (2001). ftey developed and tested a tool, Patient Perception of Hospital Experience with Nurs- ing, to assess whether or not patients’ needs were met by nurses. ftese tools, and others developed by nurses to as- sess other nurse-dependent outcomes, are an important alternative to traditional patient care satisfaction tools that focus on amenities of care rather than competen- cies of nursing practice and to evaluate nurse-dependent outcomes.
fte federal government’s Medicare, Medicaid, and
State Child Health Insurance Program both use and drive quality efforts through the evaluation of care to their bene- ficiaries in HMOs and MCOs, long-term care, and home care. HEDIS and CAHPS are used to assess plan quality. As a purchaser of care, CMS is able to demand quality and accountability and does so through contracts that specify quality measures and the identification of specific perfor- mance improvement goals. For example, CMS and states are involved in a voluntary performance-measurement project using HEDIS measures. CMS’s OASIS uses patient-level home-health agency data to assess and im- prove quality in Medicare-certified home-health agencies (Shaughnessy et al., 2002).
  
In 2016, CMS released the Nursing Home Quality Report for 15,634 nursing homes across the country (CMS, 2016). fte report includes information about quality, inspection results, and nurse staffing levels that can be compared to state and national norms. fte qual- ity measures include ability to perform activities of daily living, pressure injuries, use of physical restraints, infec- tion rates, cognitive impairments, pain management, and ambulation.
   Other federal agencies such as the Bureau of Primacy Health Care (BPHC) and the MCHB are implement- ing quality assessment and quality improvement initia- tives. For example, BPHC’s quality center coordinates quality initiatives and conducts strategic planning to enhance the quality of primary health care, especially for the community health centers it supports. MCHB, in part using CAHMI measures, has sponsored national surveys of children with special health-care needs to de- termine their health status and the quality of care they are receiving.
   fte federal government’s Quality Interagency Coor- dination Task Force represents another model of collab- oration in the quality arena. fte task force coordinates efforts across all federal agencies involved in health and health-care quality and its improvement. Task force par- ticipants are the Departments of Health and Human Services, Labor, Defense, Veterans Administration, and Commerce; the Office of Management and Budget; the Coast Guard; the Federal Bureau of Prisons; the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration; the Federal Trade Commission; and the AHRQ. fteir goal is to improve safety, improve patient and consumer information on quality, develop the health-care workforce, and improve information systems. fte AHRQ’s National Healthcare Quality and National Healthcare Disparities Reports use a framework that includes the IOM’s dimensions of care and FACCT’s patient need frameworks.
State governments, advocacy organizations, profes-
sional organizations, provider organizations, founda- tions, and others are undertaking other efforts and using the conceptual frameworks offered by the IOM and FACCT to guide the development of measures or the use of existing measures in their quality strategies. For example, the states of Vermont and California are using the CAHMI performance measurement tools to assess quality of health care for children who are Medicaid



beneficiaries. Children NOW, a California advocacy or- ganization, issues report cards on child health status us- ing the CAHMI measures. School-based clinics are using HEDIS-like measures to assess and improve the quality of care in these settings. FACCT, using its adult and child health quality measures, had consumer-centered tools for use by individuals, employers, and purchasers of care. For example, “Compare Your Care” was a computer- based program that helped consumers compare their care experience to national and regional benchmarks derived from evidence-based practice guidelines. One module provides a formulary to help inform consumers about 10 health conditions and what prescription medications are best for them.
As the preceding discussion suggests, there is consis-
tency and collaboration across the health-care system in relation to the conceptual frameworks used for measuring health-care quality. fte FACCT and IOM frameworks guide most of the assessment, research, and reporting re- lated to quality. Similarly, there is a fast-growing consen- sus for the use of HEDIS, CAHPS, CAHMI, and similar measures to assess quality in the domains suggested by the conceptual frameworks. Another trend is the signif- icant collaboration and cooperation among a wide vari- ety of stakeholders at all levels. fte current climate also strongly suggests that health-care quality models and ap- proaches must include the assessment of care in relation to what consumers want from the system, must be evi- dence based, and must use standardized and tested mea- surement approaches. fte APN will be well positioned to justify the role and operationalize the APN contribution to health and health care if these and related theoretical frameworks are used. In addition, collaboration, the use of evidence in measure development, rigorous measure testing (or the use of tested measures), and linking struc- tural and process factors to outcomes or quality indica- tors are vital for APNs to achieve the purposes of their quality and performance assessment activities.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ACTION

To meet the expectations of the profession, the APN must transform expert knowledge and skill into actions that contribute to meeting societal health-care goals. One of the most important opportunities for influence is to effect

changes that improve outcomes for individual patients, groups of patients, health-care organizations, systems, and society. fte APN can and should exert influence to make this change a reality. To improve quality, any change must be defined from an evidence base, have outcome standards identified against which to measure quality and performance, have identified best structures and processes linked to outcomes, be tested and articulated, be assessed at all levels, and be shared with all stakeholders.
  fte sixth domain of advanced practice (USDHHS, 2012) is monitoring and ensuring the quality of health- care practice. Competency in this domain is demon- strated when the APN engages in quality monitoring and quality-assurance activities. Knowledge and skill for these competencies begin with graduate education, building on the student’s undergraduate education and professional experience, and are continuously enhanced through education and practice experiences. In addition, APNs should regularly scan nursing research and other health-care literature and closely follow the media to as- sess trends and keep knowledge up to date. Many of the quality-focused and professional organizations (such as the American Nurses Association, nursing specialty or- ganizations, and nursing research societies) provide elec- tronic and paper newsletters and journals that can help the APN stay informed.
Melynk and colleagues (2014) identified 13 compe-
tencies for RNs and an additional 11 competencies for APNs to improve quality and address costs. fte basic evidence-based care competencies for all nurses include identifying questions and problems, seeking evidence, evaluating evidence, and implementing and sustaining change. fte APN competencies are at a higher level and include comprehensive searches for and assessment of research and other evidence, integration, collaboration, measurement, mentoring, and leading. Representing the thinking of experts in evidence-based practice, these competencies will help the APN to identify strengths and areas for professional development aimed at en- hancing knowledge and skills in this area. Holley (2016) calls for APNs to develop a set of competencies specific to APN performance rather than to rely on those com- petencies used for physicians. fte importance of APNs and their performance needs to be fully evaluated and their specific contributions to quality and outcomes made explicit (Naylor & Kurtzman, 2010).



   fte skills needed to effect change in the quality arena are the core competencies of advanced practice, direct clinical practice, research skills, clinical and professional leadership, ethical decision-making skills, collaboration, consultation, and expert coaching and guidance. Apply- ing these skills beyond the individual patient practice level increases the APN’s ability to influence quality. Skills grow over time as the APN gets more involved in addressing quality concerns. As others become aware of the APN’s expertise in patient care and quality, and as the APN seeks new opportunities, the sphere of influ- ence will grow.
fte APN can take action at all levels and in relation
to the practice, education, research, administration, and advocacy roles of advanced practice nursing. Each role component is discussed and examples of actions are pro- vided next. Although challenging, active engagement in the quality movement ensures recognition of the value of the APN role and better outcomes that will improve the health and reduce the burden of illness for U.S. citizens.

Practice
In direct clinical care, the APN should practice from an evidence base; deliver patient-centered care; be accessi- ble to the patient; be responsive to patient needs, pref- erences, and concerns; and avoid missed opportunities to deliver preventive and health promotion services. fte APN’s role modeling and expertise in delivery-system operations can guide others to provide quality patient care and engage in quality improvement activities. Oper- ationalizing Brown’s (2000) characteristics of the clinical role will also result in quality care and quality improve- ment. Noll and Girard (1993) provide a typology for quality activities related to APN competencies.
At the practice level, the APN can contribute to the
quality movement by collecting accurate and timely data for research and quality assessment purposes. fte APN should participate in group practice, organizational, and professional organization quality activities aimed at as- sessing quality, performance, access, and costs. Partner- ing with consumers on quality issues is also expected and desirable. For example, quality advisory committees that include consumers can be formed at the practice level to identify patients’ quality concerns and approaches to quality improvement.
  
APNs must also participate in formal quality im- provement programs and activities at the practice level. Participation and leadership in accrediting and quality reviews by regulators, including TJC, is another action that the APN can take to engage in quality measurement and improvement. Professional organizations such as the American Association of Nurse Anesthetists (AANA) appoint a member to serve on committees such as the Ambulatory Care Professional and Technical Advisory Committee (PTCA). In this position, expert advice is given on standards development, environmental trends, education, and other related issues (AANA, 2016).
Another practice-level set of activities that can be
used for quality purposes is the use of the position de- scription and annual performance reviews. Position descriptions can be rewritten to reflect the elements of the IOM and FACCT models. Clear articulation of the goals and objectives of the review and the use of stan- dardized measures derived from these models will foster more meaningful and relevant APN evaluation. Perfor- mance standards should reflect the purposes, goals, and objectives of the practice setting and meet external qual- ity demands. For example, the APN in primary care can use an immunization benchmark from HEDIS to assess preventive care objectives and CAHPS questions about patient centeredness to determine patient experiences with the APN’s care. Because standardized measures are used, the APN can compare performance to others or to national benchmarks.
fte collection of data and information to justify the
APN role, measure performance, demonstrate contribu- tions to quality, and guide quality improvement efforts is critical. Suggested strategies include the regular col- lection and analysis of data on outcomes expected from the APN’s practice; the collection of preintervention and postintervention data to track results over time; and as- sessment of patient experience and satisfaction with care. Possible data sources include administrative data (the data provided to regulators, accreditors, and insurers), chart audits, and client surveys. Use of HEDIS, CAHPS, or other standardized measures is encouraged to enhance the ability to compare data across individuals, groups, and settings. Data should be analyzed for trends over time: variations among groups of patients (e.g., age, gender, race, and ethnicity); variance from expected outcomes; differences among providers; and variations



when compared with regional, state, or national norms. Performance data should be summarized and shared with consumers, other providers, and organizational leaders and used for accountability purposes.

Education
fte APN has responsibility for his or her own, consum- ers’, and other providers’ education about quality issues and approaches. Consumers need information to be partners in their care, and other members of the health- care team need to better understand the value of APN practice. Sharing clinical expertise and participating in collaborative efforts to measure and improve quality best accomplish this. Offering information about best, evidence-based practices is one example of this type of activity.
   Advanced practice and basic education should in- clude content about and experience with all aspects of the quality process. Buerhaus and Norman (2001) give four reasons for including such information in formal educational programs: (a) given the current economic climate surrounding health-care delivery, competition will increase, and providers will be competing on the basis of quality, using quality indicators to distinguish themselves to purchasers and consumers; (b) the nursing shortage will result in greater use of unlicensed personnel and foreign-educated nurses, but nurses will still be ac- countable for nursing care and will need to ensure quality and quality improvement; (c) nursing is responsible for quality and quality improvement to meet health system goals; and (d) nurses can capitalize on emerging evidence about the relationship of staffing to outcomes to advo- cate for structures and processes that will improve out- comes. fte COA requires the master’s and the doctoral nurse anesthesia curriculum to integrate evidence-based practice throughout the curriculum. Resident nurse anesthetists are expected to use critical thing and provide nurse anesthesia services based on evidence-based princi- ples (COA, 2016). Additionally, the certifying arm, the National Board of Certification & Recertification for Nurse Anesthetists incorporates evidence-based practice in its recertification program (NBCRNA, 2016).
fte APN may be involved in formal classroom or
clinical teaching of undergraduate and graduate nursing students and should incorporate quality information

and experiences in teaching strategies. fte APN is also encouraged to include quality-related content during in-service and continuing education offerings. For ex- ample, the pediatric NP giving an in-service on assessing early childhood development should discuss how out- comes will be assessed using the CAHMI PHD measures. As a professional organization, the AANA provides professional practice resources on evidence-based prac- tice for resident nurse anesthetists, CRNAs, and anyone who is interested in gaining knowledge or greater under-
standing (AANA, 2016).

Research
APN research-related competencies include critically evaluating and applying research to practice, monitoring and evaluating practice, and participating in research. Research knowledge and skills are directly applicable to quality measurement and the interpretation of data. APNs can contribute by building an evidence base for their practice through collaborative research efforts. Us- ing data collected and analyzed to assess performance, the APN can use research knowledge and skills to promote and improve quality. APNs have contributed to build- ing a knowledge base and the methodologies needed to assess quality. Duffy (2002) described the clinical lead- ership role of the APN in identifying nurse-sensitive and multidisciplinary-quality indicator sets. fte author advocates for using a phased, organization-wide process for incorporating these indicators into data-collection efforts. Dunbar-Jacob and Schron (2002) suggest using ancillary studies to clinical trials to study questions rele- vant to nursing practice. Both of these suggestions pro- vide examples of actions that the APN can adopt at the practice level.

Administration
APNs in leadership positions can create a climate that fosters and supports quality and quality improvement. ftey can also propose structures and processes needed for quality and quality improvement such as available information systems for patient-level data collection. Even if the APN does not have administrative functions, efforts can be made to promote the climate and the structures needed. Cubanski and Kline (2002) suggest



a number of system challenges that the APN can help address:
• Redesign care to better serve patient needs.
• Improve the use of information technology for prac- tice and make it available to clinicians.
• Develop systems to coordinate care across conditions,
services, and settings.
• Promote team effectiveness.
• Incorporate process and outcome measures into the delivery of health care.
   Another administrative opportunity is providing in- centives and awards for quality performance or quality improvement. Praise, recognition, promotion, raises, or other monetary contributions can provide incentive to staff. Awards, public acknowledgment, and offering special educational opportunities are other possible ac- tions to foster continuous attention to quality and its improvement. fte APN may do these things directly or by promoting their use by leaders in the setting. Rewards and recognition can also be provided through profes- sional nursing organizations.

Advocacy
As another core competency of APN practice, advocacy can be applied to advancing quality measurement per- formance and improvement. Clearly, patient advocacy has always been a hallmark of professional nursing prac- tice. fte APN can further develop this competency by providing consumers with quality-related information, including what they should expect from health care and the health-care system. Advocacy and the development of partnerships with patients can be enhanced when pa- tients have their personal health record and information about their condition and treatment options (Davis et al., 2002). Armed with this information, patients can make better informed decisions and participate in all as- pects of their care planning. fte APN can also advocate for the practice, education, research, and administrative actions described previously.
APNs, especially those in direct practice roles, are not
often involved with advocacy at the system or policy level. ftis is a loss to both the APN and society. With their ex- pertise in practice, who better than the APN knows what is needed for quality care to become a reality? However,

CRNAs in academia and clinical practice and resident nurse anesthetists have continually lobbied at the local, state, and national level for patient safety, access to care, title recognition, and workforce development (AANA, 2016). Additionally, CRNAs have aggressively lobbied to support full practice authority in Veterans Administration hospitals. Advocacy is needed at the systems and societal lev- els to promote more resources for quality measurement and research, improve access for all people, develop better measurement and reporting of quality, support financing of appropriate services, and support govern- ment quality efforts. Advocacy with government and private-sector organizations means getting involved with the political and policy processes, lobbying, educating consumers and policymakers, and using the media to deliver quality and APN value messages. fte APN’s ex- pert knowledge and skills should be used to influence legislators, regulators, insurers, and private-sector or- ganizations involved (or who should be involved). For example, the APN using the influence of a professional nursing organization should use public comment periods to influence new HEDIS measures, TJC standards, and
state Medicaid performance measurement approaches.
  fte APN should become an insider in the quality movement by participating in local, state, and national committees that are addressing quality concerns. For ex- ample, the author serves on the advisory and executive committees of FACCT’s CAHMI, thus having influence in the development and adoption of child health perfor- mance measures. Nurses are also staff at such organiza- tions as TJC and the AHRQ and review quality-related grants for foundations and government agencies. fte APN can also become a leader and advocate for quality in the community, in the state, or in the nursing organiza- tion. For example, the APN might chair the town health committee or advisory board and develop community health outcome measures for a report card or promote an annual quality conference by the state nurses’ association.

SUMMARY


As the IOM report on the future of the profession (IOM, 2011) recommends, the transformation of the health- care system requires that nurses practice to the full extent of their legal scope and lead change to advance health.



fte ACA signaled that our society was ready for change in health care. More attention will be directed to primary care, prevention, chronic care, coordination, and other services traditionally provided by nurses. Initiatives to link outcomes to payment will continue. In addition, in- creasing technology, growing system complexity and the demands created by an aging population will increase the demands and challenges to ensure both the quality and quantity of health-care services. Accountability for performance will be required.
   APNs cannot escape the responsibility they have for clearly articulating their value to the health-care system. Because value equals quality and cost, without evidence of quality, the case cannot be made for value. Advanced practice nursing cannot be supported and the purposes of the health-care system are not as well met as when the APN is a major player in the quality movement. Al- though efforts to define, assess, and improve quality have grown significantly in recent years, APN involvement in this arena has been less obvious. To move the health-care system toward quality, the APN, the health-care team, care organizations, and society must all participate and change. As this chapter has made clear, there are plenty of opportunities for engagement.
ftis chapter has made the case that the APN must
be involved at all levels and in all aspects of the quality movement. fte profession and the health-care system are ready for greater nursing and APN leadership. As Stanik-Hutt and colleagues (2013) found in a systematic review of the literature, there is no doubt about the qual- ity of APN care. fte health-care system needs to take full

advantage of this resource. Recent and ongoing quality initiatives offer clear direction for the APN in evaluating performance, measuring quality, and articulating value to a variety of stakeholders. fte competencies expected of the APN are explicit to the quality domain. If the profession’s clinical leaders do not get involved, who will fill the gap? fte challenges are many, but the potential outcomes for the APN and society are great.
















Advanced Practice Registered Nurses
Accomplishments, Trends, and Future Directions
Allyssa L. Harris, Jane M. Flanagan, and Dorothy A. Jones



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Use research-based outcomes to describe the contributions of the advanced practice registered nurse (APRN) role in improving health care for patients, families, and communities.
• Describe the role of the doctor of nursing practice (DNP)-prepared nurse in
leading innovative health care across populations and settings.
• Articulate the future contributions of the APRN in influencing health trends that will improve the health and well-being of all.









429



INTRODUCTION

Changes in the health-care environment both in the United States and globally have resulted in the expan- sion of the number of advanced practice registered nurses (APRNs). With this growth, there has also been a greater clarity of the role of APRNs although this is variable within regions of the United States and across countries. While recognizing these regional variations, the International Council of Nurses (ICN) identifies APRNs as RNs who have at minimum a master’s degree and who possess the complex decision-making skills and clinical competencies necessary for expanded practice (ICN, 2020). Globally, the important role that APRNs have in providing care for hard-to-reach, vulnerable, underserved populations has been recognized, and with this recognition the demand for APRNs has increased (World Health Organization [WHO], 2015).
In the United States, the role of the APRN has been
greatly influenced by several key changes: (1) the Pa- tient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) imple- mented in 2010; (2) the various reports of the Institute of Medicine, in particular the Future of Nursing: Leading Change Advancing Health (Institute of Medicine, 2011), with its emphasis on nurses practicing at the highest level for which they are prepared; (3) the clarification of roles (APRN Consensus Work Group & National Council of State Board of Nurses Advisory Commit- tee, 2008); (4) the American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) call for the practice doctorate (DNP) for APRNs (AACN, 2004); and (5) a recognition of the voids in care that exist and the ability of APRNs to fill these gaps, particularly for underserved and vulnerable populations (Dubre et al., 2015; Kaplan, 2018). Addi- tionally, the international community has over the past decade experienced growth in the role of the APRN with over 90 countries either having implemented the role or being in the process thereof (Schober, 2018).
fte ACA presented APRNs with an opportunity to
provide primary care for the vast number of people enroll- ing in the program. ftis, coupled with a medical system focused on specialty care, allowed APRNs to not only pro- vide primary care, but also to fill gaps in care across settings, especially with underserved and vulnerable populations. APRNs share a commitment to distinguishing themselves as leaders, advocates, and innovators in practice. As the

role of the DNP is realized, APRNs are working within larger health-care systems to translate nursing knowledge into practice and to provide safe, quality care (Dubre et al., 2015; Mola, 2018). APRNs provide care in creative ways such as telehealth and through models that address chal- lenges in the transition across care settings, for example, from acute care to home (Genova, 2019; Rutledge et al., 2017). Although the number of APRNs has expanded, in particular nurse practitioners (NPs) and clinical nurse spe- cialists (CNSs), globally there is a need for more APRNs to fill voids in care delivery in acute care, primary care, long-term care, community care, and rural care settings.

APRN ACCOMPLISHMENTS


As discussed in Chapter 2, the APRN Consensus Model recognizes four APRN roles—certified nurse-midwife (CNM), certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA), CNS, and NP—who work with six population foci: adult-gerontology, family, women, pediatric, neonatal, and psychiatric health care. APRNs may choose to spe- cialize in areas such as oncology, holistic care, neurology, and palliative care but cannot be solely licensed as an APRN within these specialty areas. APRNs continue to practice in an expanded role in a variety of settings in- cluding large medical centers; physicians’ offices; com- munity health centers; ambulatory care practices; urgent care centers; and emergency departments in urban, sub- urban, and rural areas, providing care to diverse popula- tions. Information about populations and settings along with nursing and other disciplinary knowledge further inform and define each of the APRN’s roles.
fte changing health-care environment, driven by eco-
nomics and physician residency requirements, has resulted in new models of care in which APRNs are often used as physician extenders or substitutes in disease-specific spe- cialty care within hospital systems (Chaney & Yataco, 2019; Hurlock-Chorostecki et al., 2014; Johal & Dodd, 2017). ftese  changes  have  shifted  practice  settings  for  APRNs from community-based to more acute- and hospital-based practice settings. fte U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics proj- ects continued growth in the job outlook for APRNs by 26% from 2018 to 2028 (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020a). fte educational preparation of APRNs and the accomplishments are covered in this next section.



Certified Nurse-Midwives (CNMs)
CNMs are independently licensed APNs with prescrip- tive authority who provide gynecological and low-risk obstetrical care to women in all 50 states and U.S. ter- ritories. Beginning in 2010, a graduate degree was re- quired for entry into CNM practice. Prior to this, CNM programs did not require a baccalaureate preparation, nor did they award a master’s degree at the completion of the program. Most CNMs (82%) have a master’s de- gree although some CNMs report having a diploma or associate’s degree in nursing as the highest academic de- gree, and 4.8% report having a doctoral degree (ACNM, 2019).
Over two decades of research consistently supports
that CNMs have increased patient satisfaction with care, lowered incidences of cesarean births, decreased use of forceps delivery, lowered medication use, decreased length of hospitalization, and provided overall fewer complications with delivery. In addition, mothers cared for by CNMs are more likely to breastfeed their babies, improving both infant immunity and rates of infant mortality (Carlson et al., 2019; Loewenberg Weisband et al., 2018; Renfrew, 2017).
   Collectively these studies suggest that CNMs provide effective prenatal, labor and delivery, and post-birth care, especially in terms of supporting breastfeeding. A body of evidence indicates that CNMs provide obstetrical care that is accessible, safe, and low cost with lower rates of neonatal mortality and cesarean births and higher rates of breastfeeding. CNMs have reinforced the fact that pregnancy is a normal health transition for most women, easily managed by the CNM.

Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists (CRNAs)
Currently, CRNAs are registered nurses who have com- pleted 2 to 3 years of higher education beyond a bach- elor’s degree (typically a master’s degree) and who hold national certification to practice in this role. However, beginning in January 2022, all students enrolling in a CRNA program will be enrolled in a doctoral program (American Association of Nurse Anesthetists [AANA], 2019). Beginning in 2025, CRNAs will be required to have completed doctoral education for entry into

practice (Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anesthesia Educational Program, 2020). Most CRNAs have had previous experience in critical care, a criterion often used as part of the admission requirements to a graduate program.
   CRNAs work in hospital settings, outpatient surgi- cal centers, and practices where anesthesia is needed. For many rural communities in the United States, CRNAs are the primary providers of anesthesia (AANA, n.d.). In 2019, CRNAs administered anesthetics to more than 49 million individuals (AANA, 2019). From its incep- tion, the role of the CRNA has focused on providing safe, effective anesthesia care to patients in the hospi- tal setting. No particular groups of patients have been identified (e.g., healthier, more stable, poor, ethnically diverse, rural) as a specific focus of CRNA care. In re- sponse to a critical shortage of anesthesia providers in the 1980s, the AANA established the National Commission on Nurse Anesthesia Education (NCNAE) to oversee all aspects of CRNA preparation and to develop strategies that would enable nurses to respond to this crisis.
Research suggests that the care provided by CRNAs
is comparable to care provided by physicians who are anesthesiologists. In 2010, research demonstrated that delivery of anesthesia via the CRNA model was 25% more cost effective than the delivery of anesthesia by physician models; this study was replicated in 2016 with similar results (Hogan et al., 2010; fte Lewin Group, 2016). CRNAs provide cost-effective, safe care and are increasingly in demand as the population ages and more people are enrolled in health-care plans (AANA, 2016). Despite these positives, physician anesthetists continue to regulate CRNA practice and limit their work as in- dependent providers of anesthesia care; however, the CRNA role has prevailed, especially in underserved and rural settings (AANA, 2016).

Nurse Practitioners (NPs)
NPs have traditionally focused on primary care for underserved populations within the inner city, in rural areas, and in hospitals as well as in outpatient and am- bulatory settings. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, the top three places for employment of NPs are physician offices/practices (47.9%), hospitals (23.71%), and outpatient care centers (9.41%) (U.S. Bureau of



Labor Statistics, 2020a). NPs continue to deliver patient care in settings in which traditional physician providers are unavailable.
   According to the American Association of Nurse Prac- titioners (AANP), there were 290,000 NPs in the United States in 2020 (AANP, 2020b). Data from a 2016 AANP survey found that 79% of NPs reported having a master’s degree preparation, and 15% reported a DNP as their highest level of education (Kleinpell et al., 2018).
   A majority of NPs (89%) are certified in primary care, and 69% provide primary care (AANP, 2020b). Although the need for primary care providers and the number of NPs produced in the last decade have both increased, research had demonstrated that recent NP graduates are less likely to practice in community health or federally qualified health centers. Faraz and Salsberg (2019) surveyed recent family NP graduates from 29 programs and found that of the 159 participants, 36% were employed in private practice, 39% in a nonambu- latory setting, and only 3.8% practiced in a federally qualified health center, Veterans Affairs, military, and/or Indian Health Service setting (Faraz & Salsberg, 2019). Numerous studies over a 40-year period, which com- pared the care provided by NPs to that provided by phy- sicians for a variety of primary care–related conditions, have demonstrated that NPs provide care that is as safe and effective as physicians’ (Kurtzman & Barnow, 2017; Morgan et al., 2019; Stanik-Hutt et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2018). Additionally, patients often report higher levels of satisfaction with NP practice, particularly related to in- creased time spent with the patient for information gath- ering and teaching. Although NPs may have more return visits, they focus heavily on teaching, health promotion, and self-care, which collectively contribute to a decrease in overall health-care costs. More importantly, NPs prac- ticing within a nursing framework come to know the patient in a holistic way, including exploring meaning associated with sociocultural, financial, and other life situations as they relate to their health. ftis knowledge may significantly affect the NP’s ability to provide care that is responsive to cost, quality, and effectiveness for
both the organization and the patient.
   NP practice settings have expanded to include NPs in urgent care, emergency departments, and acute care settings. Studies evaluating care in these settings are just beginning, and preliminary research has demonstrated

positive results. A 2016 study evaluated the services for three conditions (upper respiratory infections, back pain, headache) provided by NPs and physician assis- tants (PAs) using data from the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey and National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey from 1997 to 2011 (Mafi et al., 2016). Results demonstrated that NPs and PAs ordered equivalent testing and treatment as physicians treating the same conditions. Another study examined the rate of 2-week return visits between retail clinics and stan- dard medical practices for pediatric patients diagnosed with otitis media (Rohrer et al., 2012), retail clinics be- ing the frequent employers of APRNs. Results demon- strated that pediatric patients seen in retail clinics were less likely to need follow-up care at 2 weeks compared to those seen in standard medical practices. fte authors conclude that the care provided in retail clinics was com- parable to physician care and that retail clinics may be a viable alternative for low-acuity pediatric office visits (Rohrer et al., 2012). Examining care provided by NPs in acute care settings, a more recent study found no difference in patient mortality between NP-staffed and resident-physician staffed medical intensive care units (Cimiotti et al., 2019). ftese studies lend support to the belief that care provided by NPs in these settings is safe and effective.

Clinical Nurse Specialists (CNSs)
CNSs are RN clinical experts with advanced educational preparation from accredited CNS programs. According to the National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists (NACNS), in 2018 approximately 75% of CNSs hold a master’s degree, 13% hold a DNP, and 7% hold a PhD (NACNS, n.d.). fte CNS role developed as a result of fragmented health-care services and a lack of expert nursing care at the bedside and limited continuity in care across settings. During the 1940s, the idea that a clinical expert was needed to supplement hospital-based nursing education programs took hold. ftis idea gradually led to the psychiatric CNSs of the 1950s and eventually to the CNS role today with established core competencies (Fulton, 2010; Mohr & Coke, 2018).
fte CNS is an autonomous nurse clinician who prac-
tices within three spheres of influence: patient, nurse/ nursing practice, and organizational/systems. ftese spheres



are interrelated with the goal of improving the quality of patient care. CNSs provide specialized care in a variety of settings including communities and hospitals (61%) and work with a wide range of population foci including adult health/gerontology (41%), family (33%), pediat-
rics (7%), neonatal/perinatal (5%), psychiatric/mental health (3.6%), and women’s health/gender specific (2%) (NACNS, n.d.). fte CNS may function independently, but most work with patients and staff, and collaborate with multiple members of the health-care team.
   In the past, most CNSs lacked prescriptive author- ity with the exception of psychiatric CNSs; however, as of 2020, 37 states have granted prescriptive authority to CNSs (Guttmacher Institute, 2020), and the 2018 CNS Census data report that 25% of respondents are authorized to prescribe medications (NACNS, n.d.). Most states require additional educational preparation to prescribe, including pharmacology courses, supervised graduate clinical hours, and/or postgraduate supervised prescribing hours.
   Improved patient outcomes including (1) reduced length of hospital stay, (2) reduced utilization of emer- gency departments for care, (3) decreased hospital admissions and recidivism after discharge, and (4) di- minished cost and increased satisfaction with care re- ceived have provided evidence to support the role of the CNS (Davidson et al., 2017; Francis, 2017; Wieworka et al., 2019). However, the CNS role continues to be challenged in many institutions by budget cuts. For their own professional survival, it is essential that CNSs con- duct outcomes evaluation research that clearly links cost savings, patient care effectiveness, and improved satisfac- tion to their role (Erickson et al., 2015).

TRENDS IN APRN EDUCATION: THE DOCTORATE OF NURSING PRACTICE (DNP)

Chapter 2 introduced and provided some background about the DNP degree. ftis chapter provides more de- tail about the growth of DNP education programs and the DNP role in practice settings.
   Citing the increasing complexity and demands of the U.S. health-care system, the expanding scientific knowledge base, and the advanced clinical practice

expertise required, the AACN voted to endorse the Po- sition Statement on the Practice Doctorate in Nursing in October 2004; and in 2006, the document containing the essentials for doctoral education for advanced nurs- ing practice was published (AACN, 2006). ftis was fol- lowed by accreditation standards for DNP programs in 2009 (Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education). fte Essentials document called for moving advanced practice education preparation from the master’s level to doctoral level by 2015, stating that doctoral education was the most appropriate degree for entry into practice for APRNs (AACN, 2006). However, the process of transitioning master’s educational programs to doctoral programs has been slow, and the date for this require- ment for entry into practice has been delayed until 2025 (AACN, 2015; National Organization of Nurse Practi- tioner Faculties, 2017).
fte DNP-prepared APRN is an expert clinician who
utilizes comprehensive knowledge to analyze available evidence to apply the best art and science to the care of individuals, families, and communities (Boland & Loos, 2020). fte DNP is educated to be a system-wide leader with knowledge and skills in informatics, policy, leader- ship, quality improvement, and program planning and evaluation who seeks to improve patient and health-care system-wide outcomes (Brown-Benedict, 2008; Cronen- wett et al., 2011). DNPs are employed in a variety of settings such as nurse executives, leaders, and adminis- trators in hospital and community settings; as faculty in educational institutions; as well as in direct patient care settings within clinical practice arenas. A recent survey of 1,846 DNPs members of three nursing professional organizations (American Organization of Nurse Execu- tives [AONE], AANP, AANA) found that 45.3% were employed in hospital settings, 22.4% in ambulatory care, and 17.5% in educational settings (Minnick et al., 2019). fte top three position titles reported were NP (34.9%), CRNA (26.9%), and faculty (12%). Respon- dents who reported membership in AONE were more likely to report their position title as administrator/ assistant administrator of organization/facility/agency (35.6%) or nursing (43.9%) (Minnick et al., 2019).
According to AACN, as of March 2019 there are 348
DNP programs in the United States with an additional 98 programs in the planning stages, and programs are located in all 50 states (AACN, 2019). ftere has been



substantial growth in the number of students enroll- ing in and graduating from DNP programs. In 2017, the number of students enrolled in DNP programs was 29,093 and grew to 32,678 in 2018. fte number of graduates rose from 6,090 in 2017 to 7,039 in 2018
(AACN, 2019).
   Individuals seeking a DNP may choose between two educational programs based on their career goals and/ or needs. fte literature suggests that there are primarily two types of programs: clinical and nonclinical. Clinical programs are those that have self-identified as clinical in content and focus, offering clinical practice education in baccalaureate-to-DNP and masters-to-DNP programs. Nonclinical programs self-identify as administrative or leadership in content and focus with this content offered in both masters-to-DNP and baccalaureate-to-DNP programs (Mundinger & Carter, 2019). Nonclinical DNP programs have proliferated with a reported 470 of them in 2018. Such programs may not require any clinical skills beyond the bachelor’s degree. Individuals seeking positions in nonclinical settings, such as nursing leadership or executive management roles, may choose these types of programs. Individuals seeking to practice clinically as an NP or a CNS should choose educational programs that are clinical based.
Within nursing doctoral education there are two dis-
tinct paths: the doctor of philosophy (PhD) or the doc- tor of nursing practice (DNP). For a career in research, the PhD represents the highest educational preparation

2015; Ward-Smith et al., 2014). However, these differ- ent nursing doctorate roles complement each other with the PhD-prepared nurse generating new knowledge and evidence for practice and the DNP-prepared nurse trans- lating this knowledge into clinical practice. With their complementary skills, doctorally prepared nurses who work collaboratively have the ability to move nursing science and interventions from bench to bedside more rapidly, thus improving the health and quality of life for individuals and communities across health-care systems (Trautman et al., 2018). Numerous models of collab- orative benefits have been published in the literature (Cygan & Reed, 2019; Mauro et al., 2018; Murphy et al., 2015). One example was the development of clin- ical pathway to improve postoperative outcomes and reduce hospital length of stay for cardiac patients in an intensive care unit (Cowan et al., 2019). Working to- gether, PhD and DNP nurses led a team that conducted literature reviews, developed a quality improvement ini- tiative, obtained institutional review board approvals, and conducted a secondary data analysis research study. Cowan and colleagues (2019) report that for successful collaboration individuals need to understand each other’s backgrounds, educational preparation, unique contribu- tions, and strengths and weaknesses and to commit to open and honest dialogue and effective communication.


TRENDS IN APRN PRACTICE

and is the requisite qualification for a beginning nurse	 	

scientist. Nurses with a PhD generate new knowledge that advances evidence-based interventions, informs health policy, and addresses the current and emerging health-care needs for diverse populations. PhD-prepared nurses have a strong foundation in the scientific knowl- edge of the discipline, an understanding of the science of related disciplines and translational science, and the ability to disseminate innovations and foster interpro- fessional collaboration (Bednash et al., 2014). Nurses with a DNP have obtained the highest level of educa- tional preparation for clinical nursing practice including application and integration of nursing science (Trautman et al., 2018).
Past literature has cited the challenges of role confu-
sion and overlap among nurses seeking to further their education (Nickasch et al., 2018; Udlis & Mancuso,

The APRN and Reimbursement
fte mean salary for the APRN varies by region within the United States and is also influenced by years of ex- perience, practice setting, specialty area, and education. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics the me- dian salary for NPs, CRNAs, and CNMs was $115,800 per year as of May 2019 (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statis- tics, 2019a). CRNAs are among the highest paid APRNs with a median salary of $174,790 ($84.03/hour) and a range of $127,480 to $203,730. California, Wyoming, Montana, Oregon, and Wisconsin are the states with the highest mean wage, whereas areas with the highest con- centration of employment for CRNAs include metro- politan areas such as Morgantown and Charleston, WV; Columbia, MO; Sioux Falls, SD; and Huntsville, AL.



Employment is also plentiful in the nonmetropolitan locations of West Central-Southwest New Hampshire, Southwest Minnesota, Upper Savannah South Carolina, West Kentucky, and Southeast Minnesota (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019b).
fte annual average salary in 2019 for NPs  was
$111,840 ($53.77/hour) with a range of $81,410 to
$152,160. fte states with the highest level of employ- ment for NPs in 2019 were New York, California, Texas, Florida, and Ohio; California, Washington, Hawaii, New Jersey, and Minnesota paid NPs the highest sala- ries. fte average salary for CNMs in the United States is
$108,810 ($52.31/hour). Salaries for CNMs range from
$69,000 to $158,990, and states with the highest CNM employment levels are California, Texas, Georgia, New York, and Pennsylvania. fte average salary for CNSs is
$106,407 with a range of $51,000 to $161,000. Gender plays a significant role in APRN salaries with women earning approximately $13,000 less than their male col- leagues (Greene et al., 2017). A recent Medscape com- pensation analysis reported that male NPs earn 7% more and male CRNAs earn 11% more than their female col- leagues (Stokowski et al., 2019).
Another key advanced practice provider within the
U.S. health-care system is the PA. fte PA role was cre- ated during the 1960s to improve and expand health care as well as to alleviate the shortage of primary care phy- sicians (Cawley et al., 2012). APRNs and PAs often fill similar roles within the health-care systems in the United States, although their philosophies of clinical practice are different (Benitez et al., 2015; Hooker et al., 2016). Chief differences between the two professions include educational preparation, which for PAs concludes with master’s education. fte two professions differ in their philosophical underpinnings as well with PAs following a medical model with a disease-centered focus that in- cludes generalized medical education. APRNs, on the other hand, have a population-specific focus and must meet requirements for continuing education, which are universal in the United States to retain the APRN title. fte U.S. Department of Labor reports the annual salary of PAs as $112,260 annually ($53.97/hour) (U.S. Bu- reau of Labor Statistics, 2020b). However, another salary survey of PAs reported a median base pay of $106,000 ($60.00/hour) with those whose compensation was based upon productivity metrics reporting an average

of $150,000 (Roberson, 2020). ftese numbers along with recent research demonstrate wage and compensa- tion parity among PAs and APRNs (Hooker et al., 2016; Quella et al., 2015).
   Educational level and professional experience in- fluence compensation. APRNs with a DNP earn the highest compensation with a median salary of $104,000 followed by those with a PhD at $100,000 (Smiley et al., 2018). However, others have concluded that there is little difference between the salaries of DNP- and master’s-prepared APRNs. Differences in enrollment in nursing doctoral programs by focus are evident with 4,885 DNP and 773 PhD candidates graduating in 2016 compared to 7,039 DNP and 801 PhD candidates grad- uating in 2018 (Campaign for Nursing, 2020). As more doctorally prepared nurses are employed, salary differ- ences between the two degrees may become evident.
To date there are limited studies comparing the out-
comes of master’s-prepared and DNP-prepared APRNs. As part of their educational requirements, many DNPs are required to complete clinically based quality im- provement projects, which are published in the literature. Many of these projects have reported improved patient outcomes and have prompted practice changes within their institutions. Tussing and colleagues reported on the impact of the DNP in hospital settings. ftey concluded that as greater numbers of DNP-prepared APRNs are employed, that innovative models of practice and im- provement in patient outcomes will become increasingly evident and that the DNP-prepared APRN will become increasingly valuable to health-care institutions (Tussing et al., 2018).
No discussion of compensation can be  complete
without touching on reimbursement. fte rules detailed in the Federal Register (1998) that revised Medicare re- imbursement for physicians also included other health- care providers. Currently, Medicare payment has allowed advanced practitioner professionals (APRNs, PAs) to be reimbursed in selected situations. fte Balanced Budget Act of 1997 facilitated direct Medicare reimbursement for the NP. Expanded Medicare reimbursement for acute care NPs continues to be reviewed. fte American Nurses Association (ANA) continues to work with federal agen- cies to allow direct reimbursement for APRNs, regard- less of specialty and geographical location. Challenges associated with reimbursement in  today’s  health-care



environment are often linked to care outcomes and reim- bursement policies established by insurers, mostly con- trolled at the state level. It remains critical that APRNs continue to document their contributions to patient care and outcomes. Data that link the work of the APRN to improved patient outcomes, reduced costs, enhanced patient and family satisfaction, and increased efficiency are needed to evaluate the effectiveness of care and to ap- propriately compensate APRNs. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the U.S. federal government broadened Medicare’s policies to include reimbursement for the provision of care services delivered by APRNs (Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services [CMS], 2020b), including reimbursement for telehealth services (AANP, 2020a; Franco, 2020) and the certification of patient el- igibility requirements for Medicare home health patients under APRN care (CMS, 2020a).

THE FUTURE

fte APRN is a leader in the direct care of patients (families and communities) across multiple health settings and populations. “APRN practice outcomes have been studied for evidence of improved access to care, quality care delivery, and financial impact in terms of cost savings for the consumer and the healthcare system” (Dubree et al., 2015).
   As the role of the APRN continues to evolve, new opportunities for role expansion will become available that can influence the future of health care globally. fte APRN of the future will be a health-care leader, influ- encing organizations and policymakers and will be an active participant in care redesign to increase access and affordability. Leadership, informed by knowledge, ex- perience, and evidence, will increase the APRN’s abil- ity to improve the delivery of cost-effective, efficient, high-quality, safe health care.

Future Trending and the APRN
ftere are five important areas to consider as the APRN moves toward a new future in health-care delivery. ftese include (a) the development, use, and translation of knowledge/evidence; (b) relationship building and the human experience; (c) redesigning health-care delivery in

a changing environment; (d) innovation and partnerships; and (e) global communication and dissemination of infor- mation. Each of these is discussed in greater detail next.
A. Development, Use, and Translation of Knowledge/Evidence
fte APRN will be informed by a growing body of knowledge both from within nursing and from other disciplines. New information from information tech- nology, engineering, business, and the sciences will all contribute to responding to the demands of a changing health-care system and an increased need for alternative care delivery models in the community.
  “fte time is now for nursing to reaffirm the unique- ness of its disciplinary perspective for the good of nurs- ing and the public” (Smith, 2019). As a leader in care delivery, the APRN will be a visible contributor to care outcomes, articulating nursing’s unique perspective to improving health across populations and settings. In a historical analysis of knowledge development, Smith (2019) evaluated commonly used nursing theories and concepts to uncover four themes included across philo- sophical and theoretical perspectives. ftese themes are viewed by Smith as capturing the complexities of nurs- ing, humans, and the experience of health and living (2019). ftey include human wholeness; health, healing, well-being; human-environment-health relationship; and caring (p. 10). fte themes celebrate the meaningful- ness of the nurse-patient-environment relationship in addressing the challenges of the human condition and recognize how the intentional, healing presence of the nurse is transformative in promoting choice, change, and well-becoming.
Although the role of the APRN includes many ac-
tivities grounded in other science, the intentional inte- gration and translation of nursing knowledge into care delivery models will reframe practice. In addition, use of nursing science allow for the evaluation of evidence/ outcomes that are uniquely linked to the contributions of nursing.
B. Relationship Building and the Human Experience
fte concept of relationship has always been central to nursing (Newman et al., 2008). An essential component of the APRN role of the future will be the nurse–patient relationship (Jones, 2013) but will also include growing



and building partnerships with communities, including the global community. Partnerships within the discipline allow nurses to address common patient phenomena of concern and related issues with one voice. Partnerships with other disciplines can complement nursing practice, improve care delivery to all patients and populations, and contribute to outcomes made more complex by today’s health care and the human-environment experience.
   In 2006, the AAN initiated the Edge Runner pro- gram. fte goal of this project was to recognize nurse leaders who developed and implemented innovative nurse-led models of care. ftese models focused on health promotion and managing illness in diverse, un- derserved populations. Each program offered a unique care model, but many core elements were common to the projects.
   In 2016, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation re- ported on a study that examined Edge Runner programs across sites (Mason et al., 2015). A multi-method de- scriptive design was used by the team to investigate each site. ftirty-six (36) individual Edge Runners represent- ing 30 of the models (83%) participated. fte researchers were interested in understanding the uniqueness of each practice model and in exploring if there were elements common across the Edge Runner models that could be identified and used to guide national care transforma- tion. Review of the data uncovered four overlapping yet discrete common elements across most nurse-designed models of care (Mason et al., 2015):
1. Relationship-based care enables individual/family/ community engagement and promotes new partnerships.
2. A holistic approach helps uncover the human expe- rience, particularly in vulnerable and underserved populations.
3. In an individual-family-community approach, con- sumers drive care. fte nurse-led, holistic approach to care allows consumers (individuals, families, and communities) to feel that their issues and concerns— not the provider’s expectations, protocols, or care plans—are the priority. Addressing the consumers’ priorities is viewed as critical to bringing about change.
4. Serving vulnerable and underserved populations is viewed by nurses as a moral imperative. Nurses were

committed to partnering with other groups (e.g., public health and community groups) to improve health for all, especially vulnerable and underserved populations.

C. Redesigning Health-Care Delivery in a Changing Environment
Redesigning the delivery of health care will require atten- tion to a changing care environment that is responsive to the patients we serve. APRN leadership at all levels and across multiple populations and settings will need to address health care beyond hospitalization and embrace the patient journey across multiple care transitions. See Figure 25.1 (Ives Erickson & Ditomassi, 2013). Crit- ical to this care transition model is implementing the concept of relationship-based care. ftis, along with the APRN providing coordination of care delivery across sites, can help increase care oversight and increase re- sponsiveness to concerns before problems escalate. Implementing such a model can improve how the in- dividual is known as a person, promote the delivery of patient/family/community-centric care, and engage con- sumers of care in new opportunities to promote health. APRN leadership will be critical to the advancement of transition-of-care models in both urban and rural areas. fte multiple determinants of health that challenge vul- nerable and underserved populations and the need for promoting continuity of care for all can be facilitated by developing and implementing transition planning (Commission on Social Determinants of Health, 2008).
Magnet Designation
fte international expansion of Magnet designation (2019) across acute care as well as primary care sites can be an opportunity to celebrate APRN leadership in care redesign. By participating in transformational leader- ship, promoting structural empowerment, leading ex- emplary practice initiatives, generating new knowledge through innovation and improvement, and developing empirical/descriptive evidence and outcomes sustained over time, the APRN has an opportunity to influence care delivery (American Nurses Credentialing Center [ANCC], 2019).
In addition, programs like the ANCC’s initiative
Use of Evidence-Based Pathway to Excellence Standards
(ANCC, 2019) provides the organization that may






Before

Innovations in Care Delivery Patient Journey Framework
During	After













• Enhance clinical
data-collection before admission
• Create innovation unit
Welcome Packet
• Engage patients and families in redesign

The Interventions
• Revise domains of practice
• Implement interdisciplinary team rounds
• Install unit census and in-room whiteboards
• Utilize communication devices
• Utilize wireless laptop computers
• Business cards
• Hourly rounding
• Quiet hours



• Implement discharge follow-up call program


Relationship-based care
Increased accountability through the attending nurse role
Utilization of evidence-based staffing and care delivery; hourly rounding; quiet time Utilization of the Hand-Over Rounding Checklist


Figure 25.1 Journey of Care Framework. (With permission from Massachusetts General Hospital Patient Care Services. [2011]. Journey of Care Framework—Continuum of Care In. Boston, MA: Massachusetts General Hospital.)



choose not to embark on the Magnet journey an oppor- tunity to create a culture of excellence that can be sus- tained and grown. fte APRN as a leader of care is in a position to implement these standards and to help create an environment of care that promotes excellence, fosters optimal professional practice, and enhances satisfaction for staff and the consumers of care.
Professional Practice Models (PPMs)
PPMs (Ives Erickson et al., 2017) are critical for, but not limited to, Magnet designation. ftey can be used to delineate contributions to care redesign, to clarify the role of the nurse, and to foster nurse-centric patient/ family/community care. Innovations promoted within the strategic planning help to increase nurses’ respon- siveness to issues of diversity, racism, and inequities in

care delivery; promote quality and ensure safety; foster collaboration and increase partnerships; and enhance the visibility of knowledge-driven, autonomous, nurse- led practice. Evaluation of the overall environment of care from the perspective of the consumer as well as the nurse provider can be used to evaluate satisfac- tion (Duffy, 2015) and guide strategic planning. fte APRN as leader can not only promote the development, implementation, and evaluation of the PPM but also participate in strategic planning needed to enhance the practice environment.

D. Innovation and Partnerships
fte link between innovation and partnership develop- ment is an important part of APRN efforts to promote



organizational changes in care delivery. ftis potential is not setting- or population-specific, but rather applies to all professional practices.
  fte opportunity to innovate is often accelerated in environments that have developed PPMs. ftese mod- els are generally consumer-centric and offer individu- als (families and communities) creative approaches to health education as well as access to providers and other resources. Concerns and issues emerging from the chal- lenges experienced by consumers of care as well as by providers can be the stimulus for creative innovations.
  fte APRN is well positioned to create the envi- ronment of care that promotes innovation and change within multiple practice settings. ftrough the develop- ment of effective partnerships and collaboration with other groups, APRN leaders can lead practice changes and optimize patient outcomes. Working with members of the business community, manufacturers, academic partners, other scientists, and technology and telecom- munication experts, nurses can assist in the development of devices and introduce, use, and evaluate the effective- ness evaluation of products that can have an impact on health care.
Consumer groups enhance community involvement
and help to inform innovation/product development. Consumer access to new resources and related informa- tion can promote self-care, enhance decision making, and affect health and wellness. APRN involvement in nurse-designed innovations within care delivery models excellence in care delivery and serves as a stimulus for the development of creative solutions to solve clinical practice problems.
   Currently, the integration of technology into health care is of growing interest. “Evidence is mounting to support the positive effect of telehealth on health care and the healthcare system” (Rutledge et al., 2017). Tech- nology allows the APRN to reach patients in remote set- tings, expanding the outreach of health-care providers. fte APRN as a leader of care is well positioned to bring technology, such as telehealth, directly to the consumer. ftis innovation can help ease visits to clinics for vulner- able populations; empower nurses and patients; increase access to educational information quickly across cultures and groups in multiple languages; and offer new ways to engage individuals, families, and communities in di- rect care services more efficiently. APRNs can effectively

participate in the transformation of health care through their intentional engagement in innovative approaches to clinical practice and care delivery.
E. Effective Communication Globally
As the work of the APRN as clinical expert and leader in patient care delivery continues to grow and evolve, it will be critical to communicate experiences and accomplish- ments with others. Communicating the work of nurs- ing and increasing the visibility of the nurse in patient outcomes is seriously lacking in practice. Effective doc- umentation systems and the integration of standardized nursing assessment frameworks and languages are criti- cal to accomplishing this goal (Herdman & Kamitsury, 2018; Jones et al., 2010). ftis has become an interna- tional goal in groups such as the ICN and SNOMED RT, International. fte APRN can be the catalyst for change by introducing a holistic approach to the elec- tronic health record to capture the patient’s experience and response to illness beyond the medical diagnosis or disease process.
Dissemination of evidence, best practices, and new
practice guidelines in publications can make APRN contributions visible to an international audience. Effec- tively communicating desired goals and changes to ex- ternal groups, business leaders, insurance and regulatory groups, manufacturers, as well as engineers and other sci- entists will allow APRNs to become a voice for nursing and help generate new approaches to healing and care.
   Finally, the APRN brings the voice of the patient (families and community) to those who set new agendas and future goals. If the APRN is able to communicate clearly with legislators and policymakers and to supply the needed evidence, we may be able to make progress toward the goal of affordable, equitable, effective care for all. ftis is the moral imperative for all nurses on behalf of those we serve.

SUMMARY


fte APRN is a nurse first (Mundinger & Carter, 2019). Grounding the APRN in nursing is essential to maintain clarity around the delivery of care within a disciplinary perspective. According to the Essentials of Doctoral Edu- cation for Advanced Nursing Practice, the APRN is also an


expert in patient care delivery (AACN, 2006). Advances in educational preparation and expanded role opportuni- ties provide new ways for the APRN to impact patient care; to influence the development of delivery models; to address the care of vulnerable and disadvantaged popula- tions; to collaborate with other disciplines; to partner with multiple groups to create and innovate; and to develop, use, and translate evidence to improve health care for all.
   For all nurses, a “moral imperative exists to continue to strengthen the profession’s ability to meet its goals and continue to serve individual and social good” (Grace et al., 2016). ftis commitment aligns with the WHO’s call for action to reduce health disparities (Commission on Social Determinants of Health, 2008). fte APRN of the future will have multiple opportunities to be a leader in promot- ing the health and well-being of humans globally.
















   Starting a Practice and Practice Management
Judith Barberio



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Consider the public policies that directly affect practice management such as reimbursement, billing and coding, and collaborative agreements.
• Identify barriers to and facilitators of independent practice.
• Describe the growing presence of “pay-for-performance” models and “shared savings” programs.
• Characterize the development of niche markets.
• Demonstrate the relevance of licensing, taxation, and insurance to practice.
• Justify the hiring of ancillary personnel.
• Distinguish the legal differences between and among varied business structures.
• Create an image for the services offered by the advanced practice nurse (APN).
• Create a business plan for starting an independent practice.
• Identify financial options for starting a business.
• Discuss the technicalities of documentation and the quality assurance process.
• Discuss how telehealth can be implemented in your practice.







441



Advanced practice nurses (APNs) increasingly strive for greater autonomy in their practice. ftis desire to have control over their work environment has led to the emer- gence of independent nurse-managed health-care prac- tices. However, one must consider the question, “Is an entrepreneurial spirit, a fine-tuned knowledge base and clinical skills, and the desire to provide quality health care enough to succeed?” Over the past 25 years, indi- viduals, as well as schools of nursing, have increasingly opened nurse-managed health centers only to see their viability threatened because of a lack of financial self- sufficiency (Brown, 2007; Ely, 2015; King, 2008; Vin- cent et al., 1999). New areas of concern include shifting reimbursement models, evolving care coordination models, and the implementation of ICD-10 coding. Additionally, there is concern over the doctor of nurs- ing practice (DNP) degree and how it affects master’s- prepared APNs and their ability to continue to practice as well as the impact on health-care policy issues such as reimbursement and independent practice without joint protocols.

ADVANTAGES TO INDEPENDENT PRACTICE

fte Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) continues to provide access to health care for many Americans and to require more primary care providers (PCPs) and more cost-effective services. Nurse-managed practices play an important role in access to cost-effective health care; however, for these practices to survive and grow, APNs must acquaint themselves with the emerg- ing realities of the new health-care policy agenda and display the business acumen and financial know-how that is essential to create practices that are efficient and fiscally viable.
   Independent nursing practice continues to garner support and become a reality. fte ability to maximize care of the client is dependent on having time to pro- vide an educational base for consumers that will enable them to become true partners in the health-care regi- men. Even with changes to the ACA, along with the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA), the potential to remove many of the barriers to independent APN practice still exists (Cleveland et al., 2019). A new,

innovative program to increase access to care and remain cost effective is telehealth. Successful implementation of telehealth services will require training and engaging experts in technology and federal and state laws; how- ever, the potential to reduce disparities in care and pro- mote independent practice is there (Rincon, 2019). See Box 26.1. fte time to embrace an entrepreneurial spirit may be now.



Advantages of Independent Practice for APNs1. You have the freedom to focus the practice and your energy on your interests, such as integra- tive medicine or acupuncture, or specialty pop- ulations such as women’s health or geriatrics.
2. Time management is more flexible. You have the ability to structure your workload and al- low time to examine, counsel, and educate clients.
3. fte quality of your practice becomes your re- sponsibility and is under your control. You are able to include the preventive health care and education needed at each client encounter.
4. Multiple sources for reimbursement can be identified and pursued. Besides third-party reimbursement, contracts for service can be sought out in industry and community groups. Income can be tied to workload.
5. New opportunities and requests for service provide a challenge to expand services and pro- mote the growth of the practice.
6. Staffing becomes your responsibility and pro- vides the opportunity to work with people you respect and who share your philosophy of health care.
7. Enhanced problem-solving skills and self- esteem are positive by-products of independent practice for the entrepreneurial APN. Learn- ing to constructively deal with change, resolve conflicts, and successfully implement strate- gies creates a profitable practice and enhances self-confidence and self-esteem.


BARRIERS TO INDEPENDENT PRACTICE

With all the advantages to independent practice, why do so few APNs consider this alternative? APNs have long been lauded in the literature for their high-quality patient care and cost-effectiveness (Carzoli et al., 1994; Newhouse et al., 2011; Office of Technology Assess- ment, 1986; Spitzer et al., 1974). fteir practice has been compared with that of physicians in primary care, and findings suggest that APNs provide comparable high-quality care with similar positive health outcomes (Mundinger et al., 2000; Newhouse et al., 2011). What barriers, then, dissuade this competent, highly educated, and cost-effective group of health-care providers from establishing independent practices?
In 2007, Pearson identified four major roadblocks to
independent APN practice, which still exist today:
1. fte need for direct reimbursement from third-party payers
2. Statutory limitations to the APN’s scope of practice
3. Inconsistent and restrictive prescriptive authority
4. fte inability to obtain hospital privileges
Many factors contribute to these roadblocks. ftrough- out the 20th century, physicians controlled health-care practice and health information, partially because they were the first health-care providers to be granted legis- lative autonomy. ftis legislative autonomy and recog- nition enhanced the public’s confidence that the actions of physicians were always directed for the good of the public and not for personal gain. Financial security, leg- islative strength, and a unified medical community also played a role in organized medicine’s control of hospital policy and third-party reimbursement (American Acad- emy of Nurse Practitioners [AANP], 2013; Brassard & Smolenski, 2011; Englebright et al., 2017; Hain & Fleck, 2014; Mirvis, 1999).
Over the past decade, the clinical doctorate with a
focus on administrative leadership, clinical practice, and clinical education has evolved. Supporters of this terminal clinical degree cite the need for nursing to at- tain parity with other health-care disciplines. ftey argue that increased knowledge is needed to provide leadership in health-care system effectiveness and optimal patient outcomes. Advocates maintain that educational doc- toral credentials are needed to participate in high-level

health-care management and policy decisions (Bowie et al., 2019; Cronenwett et al., 2011; Fain et al., 2008). Some master’s-prepared APNs fear being marginalized to second-class status as the DNP becomes the preferred educational degree for APNs. fte potential for devalua- tion of MS-prepared APNs exists, as does the possibility of being replaced by APN providers with a clinical doc- torate (Meleis & Dracup, 2005). ftis fear of becoming obsolete may discourage an entrepreneurial spirit.
   In addition to persuasive national barriers, common problems applicable to most new start-up businesses contribute to the demise of independent APN practices. Major obstacles to overcome with the start of most new businesses include the following:
1. Start-up costs for the practice
2. Cash flow and financing an ongoing practice
3. Accounting practices, billing, and collection of receipts
4. Day-to-day management of the practice
5. Compliance with city, state, and federal regulations
6. General and malpractice insurance for the practice and individual providers
7. Hiring, training, and retaining competent, enthusi- astic personnel
fte obstacles inherent in starting a business coupled with the unique barriers confronting independent APN practice have provided a challenge to many individuals. ftis chapter acknowledges their struggles, learns from their mistakes, and provides guidance to the entrepre- neurial APN who is considering embarking on this journey.

FIRST THINGS FIRST


You want to be your own boss and deliver health care your way. No more time clocks, overbooking clients, or cutting short the patient visit because of time con- straints. But where do you go from here? Key consider- ations and decisions must be made before you get your business up and running. fte to-do list in Box 26.2 will focus your thinking and help you organize the details that determine start-up efficiency in the world of shift- ing reimbursement models and changing patient care models.





     Starting a Business To-Do List
• Develop a clear strategy.
• Determine the area’s need for the service.
• Develop a timeline for business start-up.
• Determine licensing, tax, and insurance requirements.
• Select your consultants.
• Decide on the appropriate business structure.
• Create the business name and image.
• Select a practice location.
• Develop a business plan.
• Determine financing options.
• Develop fees, reimbursement, and billing procedures.
• Purchase or lease equipment and select suppliers.
• Hire and manage personnel.
• Develop an organized documentation and qual- ity assurance process.
• Develop policies and procedures.
• Develop marketing strategies.

KEY QUESTIONS

As you begin to make start-up decisions, pay attention to the questions that may arise. A major question to consider is the scope of independent APN practice in the state in which you practice. Twenty-nine states currently have statutory or regulatory requirements for APNs to have physician collaboration, direction, or su- pervision. Only 21 states and the District of Columbia grant APNs independent prescriptive authority that does not require physician involvement or delegation (AANP, 2020). If your practice is not located in a state in the second group, carefully read and clarify the poli- cies regarding collaboration or supervision of your prac- tice and the regulation of your prescriptive authority. Developing a collaborative agreement with a physician and creating appropriate protocols, including protocols for controlled dangerous substances (CDSs), are other areas to investigate if this is a state requirement for APN practice.
  
Reimbursement is another major question to con- sider. Where will it come from and will it be enough to cover your expenses? Payments for services and pro- cedures use the ICD-10 diagnosis coding system. ftis system requires specificity in clinical documentation in the medical record to support the diagnosis code used for billing (Breen et al., 2015; Fleming et al., 2015). Note that the ICD-11 coding system has been ad- opted by the World Health Organization (WHO) as of May 25, 2019. ftis new coding system will come into effect on January 1, 2022; however, ICD-11 has not yet been adopted by payers in the United States as of pub- lication date (WHO, 2019). Emerging reimbursement models are moving the health-care system away from fee-for-service models and toward models that reward improved health-care quality and patient outcomes. Models to investigate are “pay-for-performance” models that work well for solo or small practices. ftese models compensate the care provider for clinical and cost-saving outcomes rather than solely for services and procedures. Accountable care organizations (ACOs) are examples of “shared savings programs,” provider-led organizations or practices that are held collectively accountable for quality and costs for a patient population across the continuum of care. ftis can lead to lower costs where savings are shared with the ACO members or higher costs absorbed by the ACO members. Other models of reimbursement to explore include bundled payments, capitation, and hybrid payments that share the costs and quality of health care with providers and payers (Gosfield, 2013; Kaufman et al., 2019; McWilliams et al., 2016; Navathe et al., 2016; Ritchie et al., 2016; Terry et al., 2014).
Investigate whether managed care is pervasive in
your practice location and determine if APNs are ad- mitted to managed care panels and are listed as PCPs. If APNs are accepted in your state as PCPs and practice independently, how do they deal with patients whose condition requires hospitalization? Investigate the area hospitals to determine if APNs are given hospital priv- ileges. Even if APNs are admitted to hospital panels in your area, you will need a collaborative arrangement or referral agreement with various physicians in the area for management of your patients when they are acutely ill. Evaluate new models of care such as patient- centered medical homes, patient navigators, and  care



coordinators as a means to improve quality at reduced cost. Payment in revised models of care to improve quality and reduce risk includes care coordination for their members. Care coordination models are especially attractive to payers to mitigate the high cost of care for patients with increased health risks and those with complex and chronic health conditions (Kuo et al., 2018; Steaban, 2016).
   ftese and other questions will arise as you carry out the myriad tasks needed to launch a new business. Pay attention to details and carefully consider each question and decision you make. ftese decisions will structure your practice operations and ultimately enable you to attain your personal and professional goals.

DEVELOP A  CLEAR-CUT STRATEGY

Strategy distinguishes your business. It tells the con- sumer what differentiates your practice from the competition. It is the foundation of your business plan and dictates the day-to-day operations of your practice. So how do you develop a business strategy? Look around you and consider the market, consumer needs, the competition, your practice’s strengths and weaknesses, and your philosophy of health care and personal goals.
   Focus the nature of your practice and do not try to be all things to all patients. Competitive personal ser- vice businesses, such as a health-care practice, commonly use the strategy of specialization. Specialization reduces competition and drives reimbursement. Initially, you may want to see any patient who elects to seek your help. As you begin to develop your practice, simultaneously begin to advertise, write articles for the local newspaper, and hold seminars on topics, virtually and in-person, that focus on your expertise. ftis exposure promotes the area in which you wish to specialize and allows you to phase out other aspects of your practice.
Specialize by developing a niche market, one that
you know extremely well. A niche market is one with a unique service or product that services a particular clientele. You may decide that you want the focus of your practice to be on wellness. You can then tailor your practice to offer individual health-risk assessments, counseling on behavior change, work-site wellness

programs, smoking cessation and weight loss programs, and countless other health promotion activities that may be needed in your location. One word of advice: Know your service. For example, do not begin a practice marketing an alternative therapy without an exhaustive knowledge of these services or competent, knowledge- able staff. Remember that your competition is already established and knows the business aspects of the prac- tice better than you do. You want to present yourself as an expert in the field.

DETERMINE THE AREA’S NEED FOR THE SERVICE


Determine who the potential clients are and then attempt to ascertain their needs. If you decide that your practice will serve the health-care needs of inner-city, low-income residents, you must investigate the most prevalent rea- sons for health-care use and follow-up care. ftis infor- mation can be gathered from various sources. fte state nurses association, state division of health, and county and local health departments may be helpful in pro- viding important data. Topics you may want to explore include health provider demographics for an area; medi- cally underserved areas; and health-care delivery systems in an area such as ambulatory care centers, urgent care centers, and family planning clinics. Local businesses, such as pharmacies and medical device companies, may also provide information about the health-care needs of the local population as well as advertising and articles in the local newspaper.

DEVELOP A TIMELINE
FOR BUSINESS START-UP


Organization is the key ingredient to developing a busi- ness plan and moving your practice from the planning stage into action. A minimum of 9 months should be allowed to complete this project. Designate yourself as the project leader and determine other individuals who may assist you with start-up tasks. fte key undertak- ing of business start-up is persistence and attention to detail. A sample timeline for completing major tasks is presented in Box 26.3.



Box 26.3Practice Start-Up TimelineNine Months Before Practice Start-Up	9.  Investigate medical practice systems that con-
1. Select a geographical location.	tain scheduling, billing, records, and  video
2. Obtain contracts from third-party payers and	conferencing.
hospitals you wish to join.	10. Apply for federal Medicare, Medicaid, and NPI
3. Determine start-up costs of a practice and your	numbers and obtain fee schedules.
net worth.	11. Obtain current procedural terminology book
4. Develop a business plan.	or online sites for (CPT codes) and  Interna-
5. Investigate sources of capital investment in your	tional Classification of Diseases, Clinical Manual
practice.	(ICD-10-CM) and the Health Care Finance
6. Obtain loan applications, speak to various loan	Administration (HCFA) 1500 insurance claim officers, and submit applications.	forms.
7. Determine when telephone books are printed	12. Formalize a collaborative agreement with an
and list your practice.	area physician if required by law.
8. Open a business checking account.	13. Apply for an office laboratory license or a CLIA
9. Obtain state nursing license, advanced practice	waiver.
license, and federal DEA number.	14. Apply for provider status to managed care pro- vider panels.
Six Months Before Practice Start-Up	15. Apply for hospital privileges to local health-care
1. Investigate   practice   locations   for rent  or	institutions. purchase.
2. Inquire about zoning laws regarding your type	Three Months Before Practice Start-Up
of practice and signage requirements.	1. Arrange for professional malpractice insurance
3. Determine utility requirements for your prac-	for providers and liability insurance for the tice, sources, and cost.	practice and equipment.
4. Determine office layout, design, and necessary	2. Arrange for health and disability insurance for structural improvements.		you and employees.
5. Determine needed office and medical equip-	3. Arrange for telephone service installation and ment and determine cost of leasing versus		an answering service and call forwarding service buying.		for the practice.
6. Explore and select business consultants, specif-	4. Order signage for the practice.
ically a lawyer, accountant, banker, insurance	5. Investigate and arrange for the acceptance of broker, medical biller, and possibly an informa-		credit cards as a payment option.
tion technology (IT) consultant for your tele-	6. Design and order announcements for the open- health needs.		ing of your practice.
7. Determine form of the practice, such as solo	7. Apply for your federal and state EIN through practice, partnership, or corporation, and have		your local IRS office and state labor department. your attorney draw up all legal documents for	8. Review federal and state tax requirements with your signature.		your accountant and obtain booklets describ-
8. Evaluate all contracts with your attorney before	ing federal, state, and city tax withholding signing.	requirements.


Box 26.3Practice Start-Up Timeline—cont’d9. Develop a policy and procedure manual for the	19. Develop your practice Web site, patient portal, practice.		and professional social media presence.  Explore
10. Develop job descriptions for all employees.	Twitter, Instagram, and YouTube for their ad-
11. Begin advertising and interviewing for office	vertising potential for your practice. personnel.
12. Arrange for needed services such as biomedical	One Month Before Practice Start-Up
waste management, specimen pickup, janitorial	1. Set up your office.
services, laundry services, and ground mainte-	2. Arrange for utilities, including telephone, gas, nance and snow removal.		electric, and water.
13. Order clinical supplies and set up an inventory	3. Hire a medical biller and obtain your Medicare, control system.		Medicaid, NPI, and MCO provider numbers.
14. Order business supplies such as state prescrip-	4. Hire office personnel and train them with re- tion pads (if mandated), appointment cards,		spect to office policies, telephone procedures, business cards, letterhead stationery and en-		appointment scheduling and collection of fees, velopes, stationery supplies, deposit stamp for		and use of the medical office system.
checks, petty cash vouchers, purchase order	5. Establish the office cash flow procedures and a forms, telephone message pads, and patient re-		petty cash fund.
ferral forms and disposition forms.	6. Install your office sign.
15. Order office equipment and arrange for delivery.	7. Accept patient appointments.
16. Determine office hours.	8. Place  announcements,  advertisements, and
17. Determine fee schedule.	press releases in local newspapers and  online
18. Develop advertising information such as a	community networks and send to local com- patient booklet of services, press release, and	munity groups and area professionals. introduction letters to local health-care provid-
ers, pharmacy and medical equipment suppli-	Opening Day
ers, and pharmaceutical representatives in your	Congratulations! You have started an independent area.	APN practice!


DETERMINE LICENSING, TAX,
AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS

To open an independent APN practice, you must obtain several licenses. After choosing a location for your prac- tice, your next priority should be to apply for all state and federal licenses. Besides state licensure for nursing and advanced practice nursing, you must also obtain state and federal identification numbers and a federal Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) number as well as others to open your door and do business. fte

most commonly required licenses and tax identification numbers are listed next.

State Nursing License and Advanced Practice License or Certification
fte state board of nursing will be able to provide infor- mation and a list of documents you need to apply for these licenses. Be aware that in some states the board of nursing or the board of medicine oversees the advanced practice nursing license or certification.



State-Controlled Substances License
Check with your state concerning the requirement for a state license to prescribe federally controlled substances. ftis is not a requirement in all states; but if it is required in your state, it must be obtained before application for a federal narcotics license. Your state’s board of nursing will be able to inform you if this license is necessary and the procedure to obtain this license.

Federally Controlled Substances License
APNs do not have legal authority in all states to dispense all categories of controlled substances. You will be able to obtain the necessary information from the board of nursing in your state. DEA numbers are assigned for your lifetime; they will not be reassigned if you move to another location. If you move to another state, you are required to notify the DEA authorities of your new ad- dress. If you do not have a DEA number and can legally prescribe controlled substances in your state, you can ob- tain this license from the DEA, Office of Diversion Con- trol, Registration Unit. Its toll-free number, answered 24 hours a day, is 1-800-882-9539. fte DEA also has forms online for registration of APNs. fte application form can be found on the Web at the Diversion Control Program Web site at http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov.

Medicaid Provider Number
Medicaid is a jointly funded, federal-state health insur- ance program for certain low-income people. fte people covered include children, older people, people who are blind, people with disabilities, and people who are el- igible to receive federally assisted income maintenance payments.
   You can apply for this provider number through the state Medicaid agency. Obtain a provider application for APNs from the provider relations department of your state health department. fte state Medicaid agency is billed using the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Ser- vices (CMS) 1500 form unless the client is enrolled in Medicaid managed care.
  fte number you receive from your state Medicaid agency will remain with you while you practice in the state. If you move within the state, you only need to

notify the carrier of your new address. If you move out of state, you will need to obtain a new number in the new state.

Medicaid Managed Care
Some patients who have health insurance through the state Medicaid program will be covered under a managed care organization (MCO). To obtain a provider number for Medicaid MCOs, you must contact the provider re- lations for each MCO and apply for admission to the panel of providers. APNs are not admitted to provider panels in all MCOs. In some states, MCOs cannot dis- criminate among providers based on the type of license held. In other states, an MCO can accept or reject any provider. Check your state law concerning managed care and provider panels. If you are initially rejected, request a meeting to present your case. Pursue the MCO to re- evaluate your application and go up the chain of com- mand with your request.

Medicare
Medicare is a federal health insurance program for cer- tain groups of people including people over age 65 and people who have permanent disabilities. ftis program covers hospitalization (Part A); provider services, home care, and outpatient health care (Part B); and medication (Part D).
   If you will be providing health-care services to this population, you need to apply for a Medicare number. ftis number will only be valid in the state in which you currently practice. If you move out of state, you will be assigned a new Medicare number for that state.
   An insurer in each state that has contracted with the CMS manages the administration and payment services for Medicare. You can find the Medicare carrier for your state by going to the CMS Web site at https://www
.cms.hhs.gov/ or Medicare at https://www.medicare
.gov/. Once you are aware of the carrier for your state, you can obtain an application and apply for a provider number. Medicare is billed on a form called the CMS 1500. fte preferred method of billing for Medicare is electronic funds transfer (EFT), which can be se- lected when enrolling in Medicare for the first time or when making a change to your existing enrollment



information. If a patient is enrolled in Medicare man- aged care, reimbursement is handled by an MCO, and the provider must be admitted to the MCO provider panel.

National Provider Identifier
fte national provider identifier (NPI) is a unique iden- tification number given to each health-care provider and used in standard transactions, such as claims for reim- bursement for health-care services. ftis number may be used to identify health-care providers on several docu- ments including prescriptions, patient medical records, and coordination of benefits between health plans. Once assigned, the NPI is expected to remain the same regard- less of change of name, change of address, or change of other information provided on the original application. fte NPI is the only health-care provider identifier that can be used for identification purposes in standard trans- actions including electronic billing.
Health-care providers may apply for an NPI number
through the national plan and provider enumeration sys- tem (NPPES) available at https://nppes.cms.hhs.gov. fte phone number for the NPI Enumerator is 800-465-3203 (voice) or 800-692-2326 (TTY/texting). It can be reached online at customerservice@npienumerator.com. ftere is no fee associated with obtaining an NPI.
   If health-care providers do not have a Medicare or Medicaid provider number, they are encouraged to apply for the NPI before enrolling in these programs. Health-care providers who already have enrolled in these programs are encouraged to include their Medicare identification number, Medicaid identification number and state, and any other provider numbers issued by health plans in which they are enrolled when applying for the NPI.

Clinical Laboratory License
CMS regulates all laboratory testing performed on hu- mans in the United States through the Clinical Labora- tory Improvement Amendments (CLIA). fte objective of the CLIA program is to ensure quality laboratory testing. ftese amendments require that all health pro- vider office laboratories must be licensed according to the types of tests they perform. Office laboratories are

subject to federal and state inspection and approval. fte more complex the testing, the more stringent the state and federal laboratory requirements. However, any lab- oratory testing done on-site will require the facility to have a CLIA number.
   Laboratory tests are divided into categories, and there are several waived tests that can be performed in the office setting. A practice that only performs waived tests can apply for an exemption from inspection and the requirement of a medical director to oversee the laboratory. Federal CLIA regulations can be found on the Internet at https://www.cms.hhs.gov/clia/ and state CLIA regulations can be obtained from the state health department. fte state will provide forms for the federal and state application for a CLIA number. Pay particu- lar attention to the state regulations because many times the state regulations are more restrictive than the federal guidelines.

Employer Identification Number
fte employer identification number (EIN) is a tax iden- tification number and is needed for all communication with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). You can apply for an EIN number online at https://www.irs-taxid- number.com or by phone at 888-321-6690. fte EIN will be used to report compensation from third-party payers such as private insurance companies, Medicare, or Medicaid.

State Tax Identification Number
Contact your state to confirm if there is an additional need to apply for a state tax identification number. fte local phone number can be found online or in the White Pages listed under United States or the name of your state. Your accountant will be able to inform you of all identifying numbers needed to satisfy federal and state regulations.

Professional Liability Insurance
Many carriers cover APNs, including traditional insur- ance companies, self-insured companies, and group pur- chasing programs. Not all companies conduct business in every state. Choose a company that has experienced



claim adjusters and a formidable legal network. Inquire about the company’s service orientation and its capacity to offer risk management and loss prevention assistance and advice. Consider a company that has been in busi- ness for at least 10 years and has a good financial stand- ing. Litigation can take many years to come to fruition, and you want a company with the capability to remain in business to defend you.
   Some points to consider when evaluating insurance policies:
1. How comprehensive is the policy? Make sure you read the policy thoroughly and note the inclusions as well as the exclusions. Question anything you do not understand; it may save you a great deal of stress and money if litigation ensues.
2. What type of insurance should you purchase: “claims made” or “occurrence”? A claims made policy will cover the APN only when the insur- ance policy is active, no matter when the incident occurred. If you were to retire and cancel your in- surance policy, you would no longer be covered for any prior incident if litigation ensues at a later date. An occurrence policy will cover the APN for any incident that occurred while the insurance policy was in place.
3. Are the limits of coverage adequate? Many APNs purchase insurance based on the minimal coverage of $1,000,000 per occurrence and $3,000,000 cu- mulative. We reside in a litigious society, and this amount of coverage can easily be exhausted. Con- sider purchasing cumulative insurance that is at least double to triple the occurrence amount.
4. Should you purchase “tail coverage”? Frequently, APNs may join a group practice that already has a group policy for professional liability coverage. If you currently have malpractice insurance that you plan on canceling, consider purchasing tail cover- age. ftis policy will cover any prospective legal ac- tion from events before joining the group practice.
5. Do you own the practice? If so, you may want to name the practice on your insurance policy. If liti- gation ensues, usually the practice, as well as an in- dividual, is named.
6. Is business malpractice insurance necessary? Ab- solutely. Cover the practice. Inquire with the in- surance company about the rates for covering an

independent APN practice. ftis coverage will be in addition to your individual plan and can prove quite cost effective in the event of litigation.

Conventional Commercial Insurance Policies
Besides professional and business malpractice insurance, consider purchasing insurance protection for your office, the employees, and the equipment you have purchased. Some types of insurance to consider:
1. Equipment insurance: fte expenditure for medical and office equipment is costly. A reasonably priced property insurance policy will cover the cost to re- place the tangible assets of the practice. ftis policy should cover all medical equipment and supplies, office equipment and supplies, textbooks, and jour- nals. Insurance premiums typically decrease as de- ductibles rise.
2. Equipment malfunction insurance: Many companies sell product warranties to cover equipment mal- function, repair, and replacement. Investigate com- mercial insurance companies for a blanket policy that covers all major equipment purchases. Many policies will also cover lost revenue for the time pe- riod that the equipment is unproductive.
3. General liability coverage: ftis is comprehensive in- surance coverage that protects your practice in the event of litigation by a third party. It does not cover the policy holder or other parties specifically ex- cluded. ftis policy typically includes lawsuits for personal injury, equipment failure, contractual lia- bility, and advertising liability.
4. Office disability insurance: If your office becomes inaccessible because of property loss, your practice could go out of business in a short period. ftis pol- icy should include reimbursement for lost revenue and profit; continuous expenses such as the lease on the copy machine; funding to temporarily relocate your office, purchase supplies, and advertise your new location; and the cost to return to your office after it has been restored.
5. Workers’ compensation insurance: Most states require this insurance for any business that has employees. fte owner of the business is usually not covered by this insurance unless the business is a corporation.



ftis policy can be purchased from a commercial insurance company, but the state will regulate the benefits and cost of the policy. fterefore, most pol- icies are comparable.

SELECT YOUR CONSULTANTS

Starting a health-care practice requires knowledge of state and federal laws as well as general legal and accounting procedures. It is highly advisable to consult with profes- sionals in these areas as you set up your practice. Seek recommendations from other APNs, colleagues, busi- ness associates, the state nursing organization, and the board of nursing.
   Attorney services will focus on setting up the legal structure of your practice and providing legal advice and contract development and review. When you interview attorneys, pay particular attention to their health-care law experience, especially with respect to independent APN practice.
   An accountant is another professional whose expertise can be cost effective for the short term as well as the long term. Initially, consult with this professional to develop an accounting system, initiate internal controls, and es- tablish an operating budget. As the practice develops, the accountant may suggest operating procedures that will provide for the best tax advantage and provide tax- planning consultation.
   A medical biller is an essential component of any health-care practice that intends to receive reimburse- ment from third-party payers. Medical billers will be involved in all aspects of billing and collecting ac- counts receivable. ftey may set up and track a charge account with a major credit card company for patients who self-pay and send billing statements to patients who have been extended credit by the health-care practice. Medical billers frequently make application to insurer provider panels for the health-care providers in the prac- tice. Additionally, they will make applications to NPI, Medicare, and Medicaid for provider numbers for the practice and all professional staff. Once avenues of reim- bursement are established, the medical biller will ensure that the patient and medical information requested by the payer is completed and will submit the bill for pay- ment. Tracking accounts receivable and questioning and resubmitting denial of payments is another aspect of the

services provided by a medical biller. fte scope of ser- vices from a medical biller will depend on the expertise and experience of this consultant. Many practices find it more cost effective to hire a full-time medical biller, whereas smaller practices may hire an off-site indepen- dent service to handle the billing aspect of the practice. Judiciously assess the qualifications and reputation of the employee or service you are contemplating.
   A practice manager might be just the person or service you need if you are taking over an established practice or have a large patient following. An experienced prac- tice manager may provide accounting and bookkeeping services as well as total practice management. Services offered can vary greatly by consultant and fees will in- crease as services provided increase. Practice managers may perform such services as hiring employees; main- taining bank accounts; paying practice bills; billing and account receivables for services rendered; staffing; payroll; tracking and ordering supplies; and contracting for laboratory, biomedical waste, and janitorial services. Many practice management consultants will develop employee job descriptions, policy and procedure man- uals, and fee schedules that are consistent with the local market. Always ask for local references, preferably with other health-care providers, especially other APN prac- tices. Remember to always check references and qualifi- cations to get an idea of the types of services provided by this consultant, their experience and expertise, and their ability to competently complete the project in a timely manner.
A technology professional versed in telehealth and
health-care practices may be a professional to engage as you assess your needs for telehealth for your prac- tice. ftis professional will be able to educate you on Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)-compliant videoconferencing platforms, elec- tronic medical record systems, and technology com- panies. Telehealth consultants will be able to review the technical requirements required for your telehealth service model such as peripheral devices like electronic stethoscopes as well as the HIPAA-compliant technolo- gies, hardware, software, and Internet connectivity such as bandwidth and quality of service. Technology advice can also be found on the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)-funded site Telehealth Resource Centers  at https://www.hrsa.gov/library/telehealth
-resource-centers.



DECIDE ON THE APPROPRIATE BUSINESS STRUCTURE

ftere are basically four types of business structures for a practice: sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or a limited liability corporation (LLC). fte legal dif- ferences between these forms of business are contained in three issues: liability, the number of owners, and tax ramifications.

Sole Proprietorship
ftis is the simplest form of business, where the owner of the business and the business are one and the same. All the assets and liabilities of the business are also the personal assets and liabilities of the owner. fte owner of an in- dependent APN practice is personally liable for any debt or legal infractions of the practice. ftere are no explicit prerequisites to establishing a sole proprietorship. A sole proprietorship can have only one owner of the business and is established when you go into business by yourself. ftis gives the APN the advantage of “running their own show” and establishing a practice according to specific be- liefs and preferences. A sole proprietorship is not taxed per se. Because the business and the owner are one and the same, the owner completes an individual tax return along with a Schedule C, a “profit and loss from business” form, which is used to file the practice earnings and expenses. Year-end profits and losses from the practice will be added to or subtracted from the owner’s personal income.
Benefits from this type of business structure include
autonomy, flexibility, and the ability to make practice de- cisions based on your individual philosophy. Any losses suffered by the practice, which is common in the start-up phase of a business, can be deducted from your personal income. Control of the profits is another benefit of this business structure along with a simplified tax return. A major disadvantage of a sole proprietorship is the total liability for all start-up and maintenance costs of the practice as well as for the negligence of any employees.

Partnership
A partnership is defined as the association of two or more people to carry on as co-owners of a business to make a profit. Although a partnership agreement is

not required by law, most parties will spell out the re- lationship in a legal agreement. In a partnership there is a differentiation between the partnership and the partners. Partnerships cannot sue or be sued. However, all partners are personally liable for losses, wrongful acts, and omissions or commissions assumed by the partnership. Partners share in the profits, administra- tion, decision making, and workload of the practice as defined in the partnership agreement. In this type of practice, earnings or losses pass through to the indi- vidual partners and appear on each partner’s personal tax return.
A major benefit of this type of business structure is
the shared financial and professional risks and respon- sibilities. Decision making remains fairly flexible, and it is generally easier to attract venture capital for financing the practice. fte disadvantages of a partnership include the unlimited personal liability of each partner and the responsibility of each partner to pay taxes on business income.

Corporation
A corporation is an individual legal entity without ties to the individual business owner and is generally formed as a C corporation. It has the legal status to buy and sell assets and enter into contracts. It has its own tax identification number as well as tax return. A professional corporation enjoys limited liability in that only the corporate assets can be used to satisfy judgments; therefore, it reduces the personal and fi- nancial risk of the APN owner and shareholder. In a professional practice, the APN is paid a salary and as an owner or shareholder receives the profits of the corporation as dividends throughout the year. fte downside of this arrangement is that the corpora- tion is taxed on its profits, and then the individual is taxed on the dividends. fte owner of a small cor- poration can elect to be an S corporation that offers special tax advantages. All profits of an S corporation are taxable only as they are distributed as dividends to shareholders. Because of the intricacies of the law and the ever-changing tax laws, it is essential that the APN consult a tax professional.
Advantages of a corporate structure are the limited
liability of the shareholders, centralized management,



tax advantages for pension and profit-sharing plans, and a larger talent pool for decision making. Disad- vantages of a corporation include the costs involved to establish and operate the corporation. ftere are also time-consuming federal, state, and local government requirements and filings to deal with as well as the possibility of double taxation on corporate profits and shareholder dividends.

Limited Liability Corporation
An LLC is another form of corporate structure that pro- vides the best aspects of a partnership and a corpora- tion. Income and losses pass through to the shareholders or owners as in a partnership, and there is no limit on the number of owners or shareholders. Legal liability is also limited and members are not liable for the overall obligations of the LLC, although an individual would still be liable for professional malpractice. ftis type of corporate structure is also easier to set up and is subject to less government regulation. Be aware that LLCs are not recognized in all states, so be sure to check with your accountant or attorney.
Benefits of this type of corporate structure include
limited liability and taxation only on the member’s share of the LLC’s income. An unlimited number of shareholders are allowed, and the shareholders or an ap- pointed manager can manage the LLC. Disadvantages include limited recognition of this corporation by indi- vidual states and limited legal precedent addressing this form of corporate structure.

CREATE THE BUSINESS NAME AND IMAGE

Image plays an important role in how your practice is perceived in the marketplace. Your image is reflected in the office environment, advertising materials, your per- sonal presentation and that of your staff, and written communication. Determine what image you want to present to your patients and convey this in your business name and practice style.
   Ascertain what image would generate a positive re- sponse from prospective patients. Would a warm, homey atmosphere or a high-tech, professional office create more appeal for your target population? Are you trying

to convey the notion of alternative therapy or of new concepts in health-care delivery? Investigate what the potential consumer expects in their health-care provider. Above all, project high quality in every aspect of your practice from the service you provide to the image you present.
   Carefully evaluate the image you project in every patient encounter. Pay attention to every detail of the practice even if you delegate responsibilities to staff or consultants. Make sure that the staff conveys their com- mitment to patient care and service during each interac- tion with patients. Consider the advantages of consulting with experts for certain aspects of the practice. A graphic artist may be better able to create a logo or brochure for the practice. Perhaps a marketing expert can develop a more effective advertising strategy. Keep in mind that image considerations play a part in all your practice de- cisions and should be used as a guide for future decision making.
A business name should convey the image you want
to present to the public and will basically take on one of two forms: your name or a name you have created for the practice. By selecting your name as the legal name of the practice, you are conveying a professional image and making the patient aware of the health-care provider in this practice. If you have been part of another practice in the area or are well known in this location, your name recognition may draw in patients. fte addition of “and Associates” to your name will convey the appearance of a larger practice with additional resources.
   Professional practices do not always convey the names of the health-care providers. Many APNs prefer to project the name of what they do to reflect their business focus. Lois Brenneman of NPCEU (online education) decided to market her product versus her name. NPCEU offers continuing education programs to APNs nationally. An individual was purposely not identified with this practice to project the image of large numbers of programs with a variety of speakers. Elder Choices is a health-care counseling practice that was developed by a group of APNs with expertise in gerontology and counseling. fte name of this prac- tice conveys the target population and the focus of the practice. Ultimately the choice is yours. Consider the image you want to project and use this as a guide in choosing a name.



SELECT A PRACTICE LOCATION

Location, location, location. ftis will be one of your most important business decisions. ftink about your ideal geographical location, knowledge of the mar- ketplace, professional relationships, and professional climate. Remember, health care is local, not global. fte highs and lows of the local economy will have an effect on the success of your practice. fte following factors will play into your ultimate choice of practice location.

Geographical Location
When you consider your practice location, think about convenience for your patients and the niche market you want to attract. A pediatric practice located in a down- town business location will not be as appealing as a practice location in a growing suburb. Ascertain parking availability in your practice location and determine if it is adequate to meet the needs of your clients. If on-site parking is limited or unavailable, investigate the proxim- ity of public transportation to your practice location. If you hope to attract walk-in patients, determine if your practice is located in a heavily used pedestrian area. Re- member that your services must not only be high quality, be cost effective, and have public appeal, but they must also be convenient.

Demographics
fte demographic makeup of your location will provide a snapshot of your market. fte U.S. Census Bureau; local, county, and state governments; and private demo- graphic services can provide the data necessary to eval- uate a location. Pay particular attention to a few key factors.
1. Male versus female population in a given area. Women are the primary purchasers of health care and typically direct the health care of their families.
2. The age distribution of the local population. Age dic- tates the type of services chosen. New-age therapies might not be as eagerly accepted by a rural aging clientele as they would by upwardly mobile city dwellers. Age also influences the types of care used. Pediatric and midwifery services are sought after in

a childbearing, child-rearing population; whereas wellness programs, health education, and chronic illness management may have a higher use among an older population.
3. The income distribution in the local population. In- come influences the probability of and type of health insurance coverage as well as the amount of dollars available for noncovered therapies and pre- ventive programs. A stable or growing population is frequently associated with higher incomes and em- ployment security.
4. Cultural and language influences on the local pop- ulation. Cultural background, values, and prac- tices of particular groups of people will influence their use of health care and wellness programs. Language barriers can be a significant factor to patient use of your services. Consider hiring per- sonnel from the neighborhood who are familiar with the culture and speak the language of the local population.

Professional Relationships
Do not discount the professional relationships you have made along your professional career path. Prior employment, educational training, preceptorships, and professional associates are all sources of reference and referrals for your practice. ftese people already know you, your competence, and your skill. ftey can pro- vide references or testimonials to your practice as well as opportunities to expand the services provided by your practice.

Professional Climate
Consider the professional climate in the area where you are considering opening an independent APN practice. What are the legal restrictions to practice in your state? How will the local medical and nursing community re- spond to your practice? Will collaborative protocols with an area physician and hospital privileges be difficult to obtain? Will physician consultation and referrals pose a problem? Do not abandon a location because of these obstacles but know if they exist. When you are aware of potential barriers, you can address them and seek solutions.



DEVELOP A BUSINESS PLAN

A business plan is a written document that encapsulates the practice strategy for the future direction of the busi- ness and serves as an action plan to achieve the practice objectives. Formulating a business plan is an effective way to plan for the practice and anticipate business deci- sions. Business plans may be developed for several reasons such as starting a new business, expanding an existing business, financing a business, or managing an ongoing business. An effective business plan will describe the ele- ments needed to run the business, which should include a summary, business concept, market analysis, competi- tion, competitive analysis, marketing plan, management team and personnel, operations, financial plan, and re- payment projections. A business plan should give a clear picture of what is really required to start the business.

Summary
ftis is a concise explanation of the major features of the practice. In one to two pages, you should describe your practice strategy, practice development, financial objec- tives, and business organization. It is important to de- scribe your service and why it has promise. Describe the status of the practice with respect to a start-up timeline and marketing research. Include information about the business structure and the location of the practice as well as financial projections, financing needs, and the pro- jected return on investment. Be sure to focus on the key elements of the plan. Give the reader an overview of the practice, not a reiteration of the business plan.

Business Concept
ftis section should contain a clear explanation of the practice strategy. What sets your practice apart from other health-care practices in the area? Focus on the in- dividuality of the practice and how this compares with the competition. Include areas that might have a signif- icant impact on your strategy such as unique services, marketing ploys, or management team.

Market Analysis
ftis is where you document the need for your practice in a specific location. Has your location been designated

as a health professional shortage area (HPSA)? If so, cite the documentation that supports this statement. Describe the marketplace and your potential competi- tion. Discuss the size of the potential market and where patients are currently obtaining health care. Assess your competitors with respect to the size of their health-care practice, the clientele, the types of insurance accepted, and their fee structure. Determine if the population of the area is generally growing or shrinking and if there is a segment of the population that is medically underserved. Learn all you can about the population of your targeted location and consider this information when developing your marketing plan.
Where do you obtain this information? Seek out
reports from various area trade associations and the chamber of commerce as well as city, county, and state government reports. Research published material dis- tributed by your competitors and reports published by area nursing organizations, hospitals, medical associa- tions, and health departments. Conduct focus groups of area residents to determine what residents identify as a priority and the extent of these types of services in the specific location.

Competition
Know your competition and exactly what threat they are to your practice. Do they have a better location or a more convenient public transportation network than your practice? How do the services they offer and the quality of care compare with those of your practice? What are their practice fees and insurance reimburse- ment arrangements? Explore the reputation and image of your competition and the appearance they present to the public. Research the stability of the other health-care practices in your area, paying particular attention to staff turnover, reorganizations, and the announcements and cancellations of new initiatives. Pay attention to the ad- vertising and marketing efforts of your competition and new health-care practices that may open in your area within the near future.

Competitive Analysis
ftis section of the business plan deals with an analysis of the strengths and risks associated with your practice. Be sure to include in your business plan a strategy to address



these risks. An example of a business risk might be two established family medical practices within a 10-mile ra- dius of your practice, thereby contributing to the risk of an inadequate patient caseload to financially sustain your practice. You can address this risk by renting highly vis- ible space in a heavily trafficked area and targeting your services to a segment of the health-care market. For ex- ample, a suburban storefront operation with convenient hours and walk-in appointments located in a strip mall next to the grocery store and dry cleaner may appeal to a large segment of the busy, well-woman population.

Marketing Plan
Develop and describe your overall promotional plan. What strategies will you use to reach your target popu- lation? Explain the reasoning behind your choice of ad- vertising media, use of publicity, and other promotional plans and how they will enable you to get your message across to the target audience. Be realistic in your determi- nation of a marketing budget and advertising timeline. Remember that effective marketing relies on repetition of your message. If your marketing budget is limited, concentrate your efforts on a smaller geographical area and the target population.

Management Team and Personnel
Focus your attention on key personnel. Describe the skills and competencies that your staff and consultants bring to the practice. ftis is the section to highlight the relevant experience of your consultants, management team, and personnel. Stress the training and experience of your team and correlate their abilities to their role in your practice. Résumés of each team member should be included in the appendices. Include an organizational chart and job description for each member of your prac- tice staff and any incentives for significant performance such as bonuses or potential ownership privileges.

Operations
Discuss the major business functions of your office and describe how the work will get done. Note any services that are “special” for a practice that deals with your tar- get population. For instance, your specialty area may be

women’s health care, and your practice provides the ser- vices that are typically expected for this type of practice. However, you may also provide a special service such as bone-density scanning, which is not typically offered in the area. ftis specialty service should be highlighted in the business plan. ftis could be the reason why your practice may be more effective in soliciting and retaining patients than the competition.

Financial Plan
ftis section of the business plan should discuss projected income, balance sheets, the income or profit-and-loss statements, cash flow projections, and the break-even analysis. You should plan to show financial projections for 3 to 5 years.
   Projected income statements should describe the amounts and types of costs associated with the prac- tice and the receipts and profits on both a monthly and annual basis for each year of the plan. Balance sheets should summarize the assets and liabilities of the practice and should be prepared for the practice start-up interval, then semiannually during the first year of operation, and annually for the remainder of your financial plan. fte profit-and-loss statement will discuss the costs to run the practice and income projections. fte projected income minus the practice costs will enable you to infer pro- posed profits. Cash flow projections describe the man- agement of the practice funds. ftese projections should be made annually for the time period discussed in the financial plan and monthly for the first year of the plan. fte break-even analysis identifies the amount of cash that will cover all practice costs. In the financial plan, describe how you would reduce the break-even point if practice receipts fall short.
fte financial plan should include all information that
will assist potential lenders in understanding your reve- nue calculations. ftese projections will be as important as the assumptions on which they are based.

Repayment Projections
When preparing your financial plan, be sure to specifi- cally discuss how and when any borrowed funds will be repaid (see next section). Discuss the sources that will provide the funds for repayment as well as any collateral



you propose to use to guarantee the loan. Most indi- vidual investors typically prefer short to intermediate loans with repayment of the loan within a 5-year period. Commercial lending institutions frequently consider longer term loans and lines of credit.

DETERMINE FINANCING OPTIONS

Setting up a health-care practice involves many antic- ipated and established costs regardless of the target population or practice use. fte most common source of start-up capital is personal funds or an investment in the business by family or friends. Personal loans are another alternative for obtaining funds to use in setting up a practice. Equity in a residence is frequently used as collateral to obtain personal bank loans or establish lines of credit with a financial institution. Personal loans are generally easier to obtain through a bank than business loans, unless the business has a history of being profit- able. Bankers may look at the hard assets of the practice, such as equipment, as collateral for a business loan. Cri- teria for securing a business loan vary among lenders, as does the emphasis they place on particular factors such as hard asset collateral, profitability, or years in business. fte Small Business Administration (SBA) offers many financial programs for the small business owner. fte SBA often funds federally specified projects and ob- jectives. Frequently the SBA will guarantee up to 90% of a bank loan for a small business rather than make a direct loan to the business. fte amount of the loan that the SBA will guarantee depends on the business equity. ftis guaranteed loan protects the lender in case of default by the business owner and is made available to small businesses unable to secure funding from conventional lenders. Information about SBA programs and require- ments for participation can be obtained on its Web site
at https://www.sba.gov/financing.
   State and local government agencies are other sources of assistance for the small business owner. ftese agen- cies have a vested interest in enhancing the economic well-being of the community, and many offer various services to the entrepreneur. Information about pro- grams offered by government agencies can be obtained by contacting the local chamber of commerce or state and city government offices.
  
Foundations frequently provide grants to businesses that focus on a specific area or project and are another good source of funding. Geographical limitations are not often imposed on foundation funding.


DEVELOP FEES, REIMBURSEMENT, AND BILLING PROCEDURES


Establishing Fees
In the managed care world in which we practice, fees for health-care services are usually set by MCOs. fte usual, customary, and reasonable fees of indemnity insurers are largely being replaced by a contracted fee schedule of the MCO. fte APN can charge anything he or she wants; however, the MCO will reimburse only up to the maximum contractual allowance determined by its fee schedule. So, is it worth the time and effort to develop a fee schedule?
   Definitely. In developing these fees, you will have to consider a multitude of factors, including the work performed, clinical skills required, time spent with a pa- tient, practice expenses (e.g., rent, staff salaries and ben- efits, supplies, utilities, insurance, etc.), and risk involved in treating the patient as well as indirect care such as making referrals to other health-care professionals and reviewing and evaluating laboratory and x-ray results. Ultimately, your fees should reflect what you feel your services are worth. ftey should not vary according to the type of insurance plan a patient carries or an MCO’s maximal allowable fees.
Another yardstick for measurement of your fee sched-
ule is the MCO allowance for the service. If your fee is less than that approved by the MCO, your fee is unrea- sonably low. Finally, consider your comfort in charging this fee to the self-pay patient. If you feel it is a reason- able cost for your services and you are not consistently writing off a percentage of the fee, it most likely is a rea- sonable fee.

Reimbursement
fte National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) up- dates contain estimates for 15 selected health measures based on data from the 2015 National Health Interview



Survey (NHIS) with one such measure being the lack of health insurance coverage. ftis report shows that 28.6 million people under the age of 65 were without health insurance coverage in 2015 and 30.7 million were with- out coverage in 2019. ftis was a decrease of 7.4 million people from 2014 but an increase of 2.1 million from 2015 to 2019, which is a staggering number of people without health care (Cohen et al., 2020; Ward et al., 2016). Many of these consumers will seek out services on a self-pay basis and become part of your patient caseload or go out of plan because of the service you provide or the convenience of your service. Many patients will pay the fee for service in a walk-in, fast-track, health-care center, for example, because of the convenient location or ex- tended hours. fte best opportunity you have to collect a fee for service is while the patient is still in your office. Set up and publicize your policy that payment is expected at the time of service. Initial paperwork given to the pa- tient on the first visit should include a financial policy that explains your payment expectations, any financial ar- rangements available, and your policy on filing insurance claims. Consider the acceptance of credit cards for pay- ment of your fee for service. ftis provides a convenient method for your patient to pay your bill in full and trans- fers the risk of nonpayment to the credit card company. Most banks will process credit card transactions for a fee, and many credit card companies will electronically trans- fer funds to your bank for immediate access to the money.
Reimbursement from third-party payers can usually
be done electronically using Electronic Data Interchange to submit the claim filed to the payer directly or via a clearinghouse. Historically, claims were submitted using a paper form, usually the CMS 1500, and submitted to the CMS, indemnity insurers, or MCOs for payment. fte coding required on the claim forms refers to nation- ally accepted, standard billing and coding systems. As of October 1, 2015, the American Medical Association’s CPT codes; the International Classification of Disease, 10th Revision (ICD-10); and CMS’s Healthcare Com- mon Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) for durable medical equipment, medical supplies, and drugs are re- quired by CMS and other health-care payers.
Indemnity insurers are the traditional  insurance
companies that usually have no relationship with the health-care provider other than paying the bill for service for a covered patient. ftese insurers typically require an

annual deductible paid by the patient and then they pay 80% of the health-care provider’s bill with the remaining 20% being the responsibility of the patient. Be aware that these insurers pay “usual and customary reimbursement” (UCR), which is rarely equal to the fee you charge for your service. fte patient is responsible for any charges not covered by their insurance in addition to their 20% copay. MCOs contract with health-care providers for patient services. Contracts may set specified fees for services pro- vided to the patient or may be based on a monthly cap- itated fee, regardless of patient use. In either case, the health-care provider cannot bill the patient for the dif- ference between the contracted or capitated fee and the provider’s regular fee for service. fte exception is patient copayment requirements for each MCO plan. Copay- ments may be different for each plan and are based on many factors, including the family’s annual income level, the frequency of encounters with the practitioner, or the nature of the health-care problem. To contract with MCOs, the APN must apply and be accepted to each
individual MCO provider panel.
  fte ACA payment models, with a focus on value versus volume, continues to drive health-care providers to deliver high-quality care at decreased cost. Shifting reimbursement models include pay-for-performance models, shared savings, bundled payments, and capita- tion payment models. ftese value-based programs share risk with the provider and payer and usually include a fixed payment for a group of services. A hybrid ap- proach that combines a fee-for-service payment with a pay-for-performance bonus based on patient outcomes and satisfaction may be an effective way to achieve cost containment and value-based care (Navathe et al., 2016; Ritchie et al., 2016).

Billing
ftere is a variety of medical management software that will automatically submit insurance claim forms. How- ever, monitoring the claims submitted and tracking the date and amount of payments received requires an or- ganized system. Controlling reimbursement will ensure the success and continuation of your practice. A billing protocol such as that shown in Box 26.4 will allow you to track the timeliness of insurance payments and the number of insurance reductions and denials.





     Billing Protocol
• File claims daily or at least twice per week.
• Check all claims for accuracy and completeness before submission.
• Develop a “claims pending” report and revise
and print it daily. Most insurers guarantee pay- ment within 30 days of filing an accurate and complete claim.
• After 30 days, call all insurance companies
about unpaid claims and make a notation.
• Refile the claim if it has not been received by the insurer.
• Develop and print an “aged accounts” analysis
for each insurance company to track payment patterns longer than 30 days.
• Contact the plan administrator of habitually
poor payers and request an explanation. ftis could be a sign of a financially troubled insur- ance plan.
• Periodically review the explanation of benefits
(EOB) sent by the insurers that explains reduc- tions or denials of claims.
• Contact the insurer to discuss reductions or de-
nials of claims, and revise and refile the claim if appropriate.

PURCHASE/LEASE EQUIPMENT AND SELECT SUPPLIERS

Weigh the pros and cons of leasing versus buying equip- ment. Keep in mind that although leasing does not re- quire the large up-front outlay, it does entail monthly payments with interest. Vendors typically have varied leasing options with opportunities to purchase the equip- ment at a lower price at the end of the lease. Look at the total cash investment requirements for practice start-up, the capital you have available, current equipment costs, and interest rates on loans versus equipment leasing.
   A phone system is the communication system of your practice. Choose a system that will meet your needs and one that has expansion capabilities for the future. Besides

front office phone lines, consider phone lines for the ex- amination rooms and your office as well as dedicated lines for the computer modem and the facsimile machine. Typically, six lines are the minimum needed in a health- care practice with costs for a basic system in the $3,000 range. Other phone costs you might incur include a Yel- low Pages listing and an after-hours answering service.
  A computer system is another essential need for your office. Consider the number of computers needed for the medical biller and front office staff and the need for laptops for the providers to access patient files, document clinical encounters, formulate treatment plans, and prepare re- ferral and consultation reports. Many health-care offices have multiple computers linked together to form a local area network (LAN). ftis allows multiple staff members to access and share patient files, printers, and hard disk drives. A computer consultant will be able to recommend and install a system that will meet your practice needs. To protect patient data, it is essential to have secure telephone and computer lines that are HIPAA compliant. ftis is es- pecially true if you plan to offer telehealth services in your practice. For more about telehealth, see Box 26.5.
Practice management software focuses on two basic
areas for health-care practices—medical care manage- ment and money management. fte medical care areas have a patient-management focus. ftey typically in- clude copies of all front office forms, have the ability to generate insurance claims, assist in patient scheduling, bill insurance companies, and have a complete elec- tronic charting and clinical documentation system. fte money-management area provides managerial and cost accounting information to maximize time and profits. Items contained in this section include the general ledger, accounts payable and receivable, monthly and annual fi- nancial reports and ratios, capitation disbursements and utilization rates, and the detection and tracking of trends for each patient encounter.
CTS’s (Computer Training Services’s) Guide to Medi-
cal Practice Management Software is a software-evaluation program that reviews and analyzes the strengths and weak- nesses of the leading medical management systems available in the marketplace. Since 1983, CTS has published man- aged care software-selection tools that enable practitioners to make educated choices about management systems that best fit their practice needs. Information about this software can be obtained at http://www.ctsguides.com.



Box 26.5A Closer Look at TelehealthAccording to the Health Resources and Services	• Are there state-mandated patient-provider Administration (HRSA) of the U.S. Department		requirements that must be met prior to tele- of Health and Human Services (USDHHS), tele-		health visits (AMA, 2018)?
health is the use of “electronic information and	• What are the state or federal consent require-
telecommunication technologies” to extend clini-	ments for telehealth treatment?
cal health care and health-related education when	• What are the documentation and record- the patient and provider are not in the same loca-		retention requirements for telehealth in your tion (USDHHS, n.d.). Telehealth services can be		state?
accessed via telephone, video chat, the Internet,	• What are the telehealth requirements and re-
streaming media, and wireless communication	imbursement coverage you can expect from and include secure messaging and the use of re-	insurers?
mote patient-monitoring apps. Telehealth supports	2. Utilize a telehealth service model that works
care coordination among providers and addresses	with your practice and your patients.
health-care challenges such as fragmentation of
care, disparities in access to care, and workforce	• Face-to-face videoconferencing or audiocon- shortages  (Telehealth  Resource Center [TRC],		ferencing. ftis allows the provider to connect 2019-3).		to the patient to assess and treat symptoms or
   Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, CMS’s tele-		determine if an office visit is necessary. health policy was restricted to patients residing in	• Establishing a treatment plan. In this model, rural locations. Service restrictions to specific set-		the provider at the originating site connects tings have changed, and the origination site can		the patient and the specialist to establish a now be the patient’s home. A HIPAA waiver now		treatment plan.
allows the use of everyday communication tech-	• Seeking consultation. In this model, the pro-
nologies such as the use of smartphones. A prior	vider at the originating site connects to other relationship with the patient was a requirement	providers to forward data or images for a fu- for a telehealth visit before COVID-19 and re-	ture consultation and feedback.
mains one; however, CMS has said that HHS	• Providing consultation. fte provider receives
will not conduct audits to ensure this relationship	data or images from and offers consultation for claims during the public health emergency	to other providers.
(CMS, 2020). Be mindful that these changes in	• Contracted services. fte provider contracts
policy are the result of a public health emergency,	with a telehealth service to provide health-care and policy may change again once the crisis has	consultations to their patients. Some service passed.	companies contract with providers for both
1. Know federal and state laws and regulations.	• consultation and direct patient care.
Remote monitoring. fte provider is able to
• What is required to offer telehealth treatment	monitor patients remotely with the use of re- to patients in another state? Do you need a	mote patient monitoring equipment.
license in that state?
• What are the prescribing limitations in your	3. Evaluate your technology needs for support
state, such as having an in-person visit prior	and legal compliance.
to telehealth or opioid prescribing (Federa-	When you consider different platforms and sys- tion of State Medical Boards [FSMB], 2020)?	tems, make sure they are compliant with HIPAA


Box 26.5A Closer Look at Telehealth—cont’dand are approved or cleared by the Food and	• Consider sustainability and the ability of your Drug Administration (FDA). Ensure that your		service provider to comply with HIPAA reg- systems are encrypted and password protected		ulations, billing, and evolution of technology and that the technology company conforms to		and policy regulations.
all HIPAA regulations.	• Observe federal and state regulations that im-
• Be aware of technical requirements for use of	pact telehealth.
peripheral devices, such as otoscopes or elec-	5. Provide quality telehealth care by using
tronic stethoscopes.
• Choose  HIPAA-compliant hardware and	patient-centered communication.
software and enter business agreements only	• Begin your virtual encounter by focus- with vendors who affirm in writing that they		ing on the patient’s goals, preferences, and follow all HIPAA regulations (TRC, 2019-2).		priorities.
• Confirm that informed consent and docu-	• Actively listen to their responses and summa- mentation software adheres to HIPAA require-		rize and reflect on their statement. Enable the ments and is encrypted (Agency for Healthcare		patient’s priorities to lead the discussion. Research and Quality [AHRQ], n.d.).	• Formulate a plan based on shared deci-
• Utilize technology that does not exceed your	sion making with your patient and re- practice’s bandwidth and provides the quality	quest their summary of the plan to ensure of service required for your telehealth service	comprehension.
model.	• Always end the virtual encounter with the pa-
• Create emergency plans in case there is an	tient’s assurance that you have answered their acute care situation or technology fails.	questions and that they have your contact
4. Comprehend the practice guidelines to in-	information or e-portal access information in
corporate telehealth into your practice.	• case questions arise.
Following the visit, document that the en-
• Check with your specialty nursing organiza-	counter was via telehealth, the location of the tion and your state board of nursing for specific	patient and the provider, the date and stop guidelines to telehealth in your specialty area.	and start time, the patient’s consent to the
• Adhere to technical guidelines  and select	virtual encounter, other providers or person-
equipment that meets the needs of your prac-	nel participating in the visit, and the reason tice and your budget.	for using telehealth.


Before purchasing any medical management system, con- tact several vendors and request a demonstration of their products. It is also wise to obtain references and contact local practices that use a particular system and ask about ease of use and their satisfaction with the system.
   Durable equipment, such as office furniture, exam- ination tables, electrocardiogram machines, and so on, can be obtained from vendors such as durable equipment companies and medical supply companies. Investigate

the purchase of secondhand medical equipment through brokers or through advertising in nursing and medical journals. Occasionally, you may find office and medical equipment for sale because of the retirement or death of a practitioner or the downsizing of a health-care facility. If you purchase equipment through a vendor, be sure to compare costs by obtaining quotes on equipment, war- ranties, and services offered. Be sure to include “hidden” costs, such as termination fees, if leasing; federal, state,



and local taxes, if applicable; shipping and installation charges; post-warranty maintenance charges; and inter- est costs for installment purchases.
   fte purchase of disposable medical supplies and pe- riodic reordering of supplies is another financial con- sideration. Establish an organized purchasing system by centralizing the ordering process. Consider assigning one person in the practice to be responsible for tracking and ordering supplies. fte designated person will talk to sales representatives and will become familiar with sup- pliers and prices to comparison shop for the best qual- ity supplies at the cheapest price. Centralized ordering requires the purchaser to ascertain the quantity of sup- plies used per month, which assists in the development of an inventory process. ftis decreases unnecessary in- ventory, prevents running out of needed supplies, and averts higher prices because of “emergency” ordering.

HIRE AND MANAGE PERSONNEL

APNs who open an independent practice and hire em- ployees must have a working knowledge of the laws and statutes regulating a health-care practice as well as a work- ing knowledge of how to develop internal guidelines for hiring and managing personnel. Human resource man- agement incorporates all the federal, state, and local laws and regulations that must be complied with by the health-care practice. ftese laws govern how employees must be treated and paid, and they protect the rights of the employees in the workplace. fte components of hu- man resource management include the following:
1. Administration: Activities include developing and updating employee handbooks, guides and regu- lations, and posters; developing procedures for re- cruiting, hiring, review, discipline, and termination; and having labor law expertise or a consultant.
2. Labor and liability issues: Knowledge of and com- pliance with a multitude of government regulations such as the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), Federal Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA), Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). ftese laws deal with wrongful termination, unemployment, discrimination, sexual harassment, and employee

rights. fte practitioner additionally must deal with immigration regulations and other government rules such as personnel record keeping (W4, I-9, etc.).
3. Payroll information and processing: Knowledge and management of activities that include employer tax administration, record keeping, reporting, payroll calculations and deductions, paycheck imprinting and distribution, W2s and W4s, quarterly reports, unemployment administration, management re- ports, and time-off use and accruals.
4. Workers’ compensation: Knowledge of state law re- quirements and purchase of insurance from a qualified carrier, state insurance fund, or becom- ing self-insured according to state law regulations. Activities include claims filings, management and administration, fraud investigation and defense, au- dits and loss control, communication with injured employees, and return-to-work procedures.
5. Safety: fte Occupational Safety and Health Admin- istration (OSHA) regulations require that employ- ees have a workplace safe from recognized hazards. Employer activities include the establishment and implementation of an illness and injury prevention program that includes general and specific safety training and required protective equipment.
6. Benefits: Knowledge and compliance of mandatory benefits that include overtime pay, unemployment insurance, and work breaks. Development and management of optional benefits such as health insurance, pension plans, vacation time, sick time, personal time off, continuing or advanced educa- tion credits, travel, bonuses, and so on.
   ftere are many government regulations and time- consuming human resource responsibilities that must be dealt with before you open up your practice. Some practitioners hire an experienced office manager and rely on outside service providers such as a payroll service, in- surance agent, and bookkeeper as well as the expertise of an accountant and lawyer on retainer. ftis still leaves the responsibility of developing the employee handbook and job descriptions and advertising for, interviewing, hiring, training, and evaluating personnel to the APN or a designee.
   An innovative alternative to in-house human re- source management is to outsource this responsibility to



a professional employer organization (PEO). fte PEO specializes in labor management and cost control and handles all the human resource issues while the APN maintains functional control of the employees. fte PEO becomes the “employer of record” for your workplace employees; by combining your employees with the em- ployees of many other practices, the PEO is able to offer the employees better benefits such as health insurance, retirement plans, credit unions, and so on. As the owner, the APN benefits because the PEO has relieved the APN of the liability of compliance and administration of mandated government regulations and payroll ad- ministration and management. fte PEO has no finan- cial interest or ownership in the practice and only deals with employee issues. An example of a PEO is Medical Management Consultants, Inc., which can be accessed at https://www.mmchr.com.

DEVELOP AN ORGANIZED
DOCUMENTATION AND QUALITY ASSURANCE PROCESS

Documentation
Organizing documentation for a health-care practice fa- cilitates the smooth flow of business activity. In addition to the front office forms such as patient intake forms, patient rights forms, and release of information forms, the APN must develop and organize the medical record, patient educational materials, and patient authorization forms such as the “informed consent to treat” forms. One of the most important documents of an APN prac- tice is the medical record. A well-documented, legible, and logically structured medical record will facilitate claims processing and may serve as a legal document to substantiate patient care. fte medical record is confiden- tial and can be released to third parties only with patient consent. Frequently the consent to treatment includes a “release of records” statement allowing records to be sent to third-party payers, if requested. Key elements of an effective medical record are as follows:
1. Organization and format: All medical records should be uniform with separate sections for patient infor- mation, annual screening list, problem list, medica- tion list, test results, consultations, daily encounter

or progress notes, and other forms necessary for your particular practice. Information contained in these sections must be adequately secured and in chronological order. All coding on the charts, such as allergies or chronic health problems, must be uni- form; and the interpretation of the coding must be well known to all personnel.
2. Timeliness: Medical notations must be written at the time of the patient encounter. Always include the date and time of the patient contact in the progress notes. If notes are dictated, this should be at the time of the patient encounter. fte notes must be proof- read and signed by the health-care provider, prefera- bly before they are entered into the medical record.
3. Accurate records: Record all information using a concise and accurate format. Many APNs use a SOAP format to concisely record the patient’s subjective statements and the provider’s objective findings, assessment, and plan of care. Handwritten progress notes must be leg- ible to prevent misinterpretations and clinical errors.
4. Corrections: Alteration of a medical record is un- lawful. If an error has been made, draw a single line through the entry and add the correct infor- mation. Be sure to include the date, time, and your signature next to the correction or in the margin of the record. An addendum is also acceptable and can be added at the end of the record with a cross- reference to the original note. fte date and time of the addendum are noted and signed by the author.
5. Telephone conversations: Document all patient calls in the record with time, date, nature of the conver- sation, actions taken, and signature of the provider. Calls or conversations with family should also be included in the progress notes with the date, time, nature of the conversation, and provider signature. If calls were placed for consultations, appointments, or equipment rentals for the patient, this should also be recorded in the progress notes, dated, and signed.
6. Treatment plan and instructions: Record your plan of treatment for your patient including important instructions, educational information given verbally or in writing, and warnings about interactions or complications that may occur. A well-written and organized medical record will be your first line of defense against a malpractice claim and will facili- tate accurate and timely claims processing.



Quality Assurance
MCOs, insurers, and the public are increasingly ask- ing health-care providers to demonstrate the value and improve the quality of their services. If outcomes man- agement (OM) and performance improvement (PI) processes are put into place when the practice opens, then data collection about the quantity, quality, and cost-effectiveness of the practice will be built into the foundation of the practice. OM is the process by which you measure, track, modify, and achieve the best clini- cal outcomes (quality) while incurring the fewest over- all costs such as economic, intellectual, technical, and time spent (cost-effectiveness). PI involves the measure- ment, evaluation, and improvement in the quality of the services of the practice and the patient care received through a systematic and collaborative examination of the practice’s entire operation (quality and quantity).
fte initial step of OM is to determine what outcomes
are to be measured (e.g., up-to-date immunization status of children under age 6) or what change in functional status will be noted (e.g., maintain fasting blood sugar lower than 130 for the diabetic patient). Outcome mea- surements vary between what is valued by the patient and what provides information to the health-care provider to improve care and reduce cost. fte diabetic patient values a good quality of life free from complications of diabe- tes mellitus, such as decreased vision, peripheral neu- ropathy, fatigue, and polyuria. fte health-care provider values 100% immunization coverage of the pediatric pa- tients to prevent unnecessary illness and complications that could lead to serious injury and costly health care. Both of these examples represent appropriate areas to monitor outcomes of patient care.
In addition to monitoring clinical outcomes mea-
suring the effects of treatment and the functional status of patients receiving treatment, other areas to monitor include patient satisfaction and financial and economic factors. Patient satisfaction evaluates the patient’s satis- faction with the services provided by the practice staff and the health-care provider. Although not an indicator of the clinical quality of the provider, it does measure the provider quality. A review of the literature suggests that patient satisfaction highly correlates to clinical out- comes. A patient who feels respected by the staff and informed, educated, and considerately treated by the

health-care provider is more apt to follow a treatment regimen and return for follow-up care.
   To maintain cost-effectiveness while offering quality services, financial and economic factors must be eval- uated. Measuring the cost of resources consumed to produce a clinical outcome will evaluate these factors. Patients diagnosed with diabetes mellitus frequently re- quire large amounts of time to educate them about the disease and possible complications, treatment plan, and medications. Measuring the time that the health pro- vider spends to maintain the health of these patients and the costs involved might justify the purchase of addi- tional patient education materials or hiring a registered nurse (RN) who is also a diabetic educator.
PI integrates the concepts of OM by evaluating the
data received from the patient and the provider and using the findings to improve patient care and practice services. fte benefits of PI include continuous monitor- ing of health-care delivery, effective use and cost con- tainment, and the development of practice guidelines for your health-care practice. PI processes should permeate all facets of the practice to ensure high-quality health care at the lowest cost.
   Primary accrediting bodies in health care and third-party payers are increasingly using and requiring OM data from providers to accredit or evaluate their performance. Insurance companies use this informa- tion to evaluate the retention of practitioners on their provider panels as well as to sell services to employers. Health-care providers are increasingly subject to clinical and economic profiling by MCO plans, insurance com- panies, and consumer groups.
  fte National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) has included in its health plan employer data and information set (HEDIS) the monitoring of addi- tional quality criteria such as access to and availability of care, health plan stability, use of selected services, patient orientation, and translation services, to name a few. fte NCQA is the primary accrediting body of MCOs and health maintenance organizations and is a major organi- zation looking after consumer interests and rating health plans and providers. Annually, the NCQA requests that all managed care plans submit information about them- selves and publishes a report card titled “Quality Com- pass” that rates the health plans. ftis document is sold to medical plans, employers, and various other health-care



consultants. For information about this report or to ob- tain a copy of this document, visit the NCQA Web site at https://www.ncqa.org.
   Performance standards will become increasingly more important in the years to come as health-care providers are asked to document the value and improve the qual- ity of their services. Strategies for complying with per- formance criteria must be a top priority for health-care practices. Delegating responsibility for continuous qual- ity improvement monitoring and implementing tracking systems for compliance will greatly improve the use of performance standards for the practice. Revising practice services based on data from the performance standards and rewarding staff and providers for compliance and high scores will improve the practice’s entire operation and increase the value and reputation of the practice.

DEVELOP POLICIES AND PROCEDURES

Practice policies, procedures, and protocols should be written in great detail and should be part of every em- ployee’s orientation. Employees are expected to know these guidelines to ensure the smooth functioning of the practice. Additionally, important procedures and proto- cols such as a protocol for handling a medical emergency, a policy on confidentiality or annual equipment mainte- nance, and a procedure for handling patient complaints or termination of the professional relationship should also be outlined in this manual. Because this manual is essential to providing organized, high-quality services, each employee should sign a written acknowledgment that the practice manual has been read, and this form should become part of the employee’s personnel record. Specific office policies, procedures, and protocols that should be developed are listed in Box 26.6. Responsibility for the initial development of the practice policy manual should be the APN’s. However, updates and maintenance of this manual can be delegated to the office manager or
another employee after the manual is established.

DEVELOP MARKETING STRATEGIES

Marketing can take many forms from word of mouth to high-priced television appearances. ftese external



Necessary Policies, Procedures,
     and Protocols
• Communicating practice fees
• Office collection procedures
• Billing policies and follow-up
• Release of records procedure
• Registering a patient
• Source of patient referral log
• Setting up the patient record
• Completing the superbill
• Scheduling patient appointments
• Closing and reconciling daily cash collections and disbursements
• Cleaning laboratory equipment
• Performing an electrocardiogram
• Scheduling a laboratory test
• Handling test results and consultation reports
• Referring patients for consultation
• Arranging services for patient care
• Protocols for purchasing equipment and supplies
• Equipment maintenance policy
• Handling a medical emergency protocol
• Confidentiality policy
• Protocol for handling patient complaints
• Procedure for termination of patient care
marketing strategies are tangible ways of reaching your target population to advertise the location of your prac- tice and the services you provide. ftere are also inter- nal strategies that you can employ to retain your patient base and increase your patient loyalty. For example, the internal strategies of competence and concern can be ex- pressed through efficiency and friendliness of the staff and health-care provider.
   A marketing budget should be an essential part of your start-up operational budget. Marketing is your practice’s form of communication to the target popula- tion. ftis is how you inform patients about your loca- tion and what you can do to help them maintain their health or resolve a health problem. Marketing is not an optional expense.



   A marketing plan helps you to organize your activi- ties and prevents “lost opportunities” to showcase your practice or high-cost “emergency” printing of practice brochures or appointment cards. Opportunities to showcase your practice can be found in many areas. Contact your local chamber of commerce to see if there is a “Welcome Wagon” service for new residents in your town and inquire about including your practice bro- chure for distribution to these consumers. Join commu- nity organizations to become known in your area and volunteer to offer free seminars on health-care topics. Inquire about membership in local speakers’ bureaus in your community or through professional organizations such as the state nurses association or the state board of nursing. Offer to participate in community and or- ganizational health fairs and screenings that are being planned in your area. Repetition is the name of the game. Your name, location, and services need to be re- peated many times before they are remembered. Before opening your practice, be sure to order stationery, ap- pointment cards, brochures, and announcement cards with your practice name, address, and telephone num- ber engraved. Also order an inscribed stamp to imprint the name, address, and phone number of your practice on educational materials or any other forms of informa- tion that may be distributed to patients in your office or potential patients at speaking engagements and health fairs. Develop and submit articles that highlight health topics to local newspapers and community bulletins, being sure to briefly describe who you are, where you are located, and what services you offer. Before opening your doors, submit practice announcements to local media services such as cable television bulletin boards, community radio programs, local newspapers, and community bulletins, brochures, and calendars.
Don’t underestimate the power of the Internet and
social media networking. Patients search for health-care providers on the Internet using Google, and with more than 88 billion Google searches per month, search en- gine optimization is a necessity (Jackson et al., 2011).
   Developing a Web site to advertise key information about your practice is essential. Getting that Web site seen by consumers requires a strategy to reach the top of a search engine list. Two such strategies are repetition of key words in the title and beginning of any article and the frequency and repetition of these key words throughout

the Web site, article, or advertisement (Maley & Baum, 2010). Globally there are 3.77 billion Internet users to- day, which accounts for 50% of the world population. ftirty-seven percent of Internet users, or 2.8 billion peo- ple, are active on at least one social network site. With the penetration of mobile phone users at 108% world- wide and 34% of those users active on social media sites via mobile applications, even areas with low Internet penetration now have access to social media (Tuten & Solomon, 2018). Additional social media networking includes advertising via YouTube, a professional page on Facebook for your business, and even having a follow- ing on Twitter. With 35- to 55-year-olds being the fastest growing segment on Facebook with an average daily use of 20 minutes, you will quickly build up an online commu- nity for your professional page. Twitter helps you build a community of people interested in what you have to say. Twitter reaches more than 800 million search queries each day, and searches have increased by 33% in the last year (Schneider et al., 2010). ftese 21st century market- ing tools will become a mainstay of your marketing plan. Last, be sure to educate your staff about your creden- tials and what services you offer. Your staff is marketing your practice every time they answer questions or speak to a potential patient. Be sure they know about your education, experience, and specialty training as well as
what services you offer.
















The Advanced Practice Nurse as Employee or Independent Contractor
Legal and Contractual Considerations
Kathleen  M. Gialanella



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Describe the differences between an employee and an independent contractor.
• Discuss liability concerns for an independent contractor if a negligence case arises.
• List two sources of whistleblower protection.
• Categorize the types of terms contained in employment and independent contrac- tor agreements.
• Explain what a covenant not to compete is.
• Assess possible exposure to charges of fraud and abuse.




INTRODUCTION

Advanced practice nurses (APNs) who do not have their own health-care practices need to be clear about whether they are practicing for others as employees or as

independent contractors. (For those who decide to form their own APN practices as discussed in Chapter 26, there is a need to be clear about whether other workers in those practices are employees or independent con- tractors.) fte difference between an employee and an
467



independent contractor is a legal one based on common law or statutory definitions (Internal Revenue Service [IRS], 2019a). In general, if the individual or entity for whom the APN performs services controls what the APN does and when and how it is done, the APN is an employee, despite having the autonomy to make treat- ment decisions for patients. If, however, the individual or entity oversees only the result of the APN’s work and not the manner or method in which the work is done, the APN may be considered an independent contractor (IRS, 2019b). However, the distinction between the two is not always clear-cut. An incorrect categorization can have significant legal, tax, and financial implications. fte issue can be further complicated if the state in which the APN works has laws that are more stringent than the IRS regulations in determining the differences between an employee and an independent contractor. ftis chapter explores these implications and includes a discussion of the various contractual issues that apply to employment and independent contractor agreements. Pertinent case law is discussed as well.

EMPLOYEE OR INDEPENDENT
CONTRACTOR: WHAT DIFFERENCE DOES IT MAKE?

An APN’s status as an employee or independent contrac- tor is a significant factor when considering issues pertain- ing to professional liability and other legal, tax, financial, and contractual situations. Independent contractors are considered self-employed (IRS, 2019c). Some APNs have only one status. Others are employed and also work part-time elsewhere as an independent contractor (or as a sole proprietor with a part-time practice of their own—another form of self-employment). APNs who do both are subject to the implications discussed next about employees when they are working in that capacity, and they are subject to the implications about independent contractors when they are working in that capacity.

Professional Liability Considerations
With regard to liability exposure, employees alleged to have engaged in negligence or malpractice will likely find a safe harbor in the doctrine of respondeat superior. ftis

legal doctrine holds that an employer is responsible for the acts of its employee. ftus, if an employee is acting within the scope of their employment and is sued for negligent treatment of a patient, the employer is vicar- iously liable for the damages sustained by the patient. Although this doctrine will not prevent an employed APN from being individually named as a defendant in a lawsuit, it does give the employee a level of protection that is unavailable to APNs who function as indepen- dent contractors, especially if the employer is adequately insured. Regardless of the APN’s work status, however, it is wise to have a professional liability insurance policy. ftis assures the APN that coverage is available whether working as an employee, an independent contractor, or a sole proprietor and even when acting outside any type of work setting. An in-depth discussion of these consid- erations and the liability insurance implications can be found in Chapter 29.

Financial and Tax Implications
APNs who practice as employees receive paychecks that have monies withheld by the employer. fte monies that are withheld include state and federal income tax payments, payments to Social Security and Medicare, as well as unemployment and disability taxes. In ad- dition, the employer is responsible for paying its share of any Social Security, Medicare, and unemployment and disability taxes due on that employee’s wages. fte employer is responsible for forwarding any amounts withheld from the employee’s paycheck, as well as its share of such payments, to the appropriate state and federal government agencies. fte employer must also issue mandatory quarterly and annual reports to the government and provide a Form W-2 statement to each of its employees showing the total amount of taxes that were withheld from the employee’s pay during the pre- vious year.
In the past, employees were able to itemize and de-
duct a portion of their unreimbursed business expenses (e.g., dues for professional organizations, subscriptions to professional journals, qualifying work-related educa- tion, and premiums for professional liability insurance) on their federal income tax returns. ftat is no longer permitted due to federal tax reform legislation that was enacted at the end of 2017 (IRS, 2020a). (Keep in mind



that some states may differ and will allow certain deduc- tions on the state income tax return.) As a result, APNs who are negotiating a contract with a potential or ex- isting employer should consider requesting reimburse- ment of such out-of-pocket expenses or direct payment of certain expenses by the employer, such as professional licensing and certification fees.
   If the APN practices as an independent contractor, the organization to which they provide services must issue a Form 1099-MISC showing the total amount of money it paid to the APN during the previous year. Unlike the employee, the independent contractor is considered self-employed. ftis means they are respon- sible for paying their own income and self-employment taxes and are required to pay quarterly estimated taxes to avoid penalties (IRS, 2020b). fte organization is not required to withhold any taxes or make any Social Se- curity or Medicare payments that an employer would be required to make. fte savings in time and money that independent contractor arrangements present to the organization make it an attractive alternative for the organization.
If the APN is an independent contractor, their busi-
ness expenses are reported annually on Schedule C of the income tax return. ftese expenses can be deducted from the APN’s gross income to reduce taxable income, unlike business expenses that an employee incurs. Such deductions include the expense of operating a vehicle for work (or taking a standard mileage rate), fees for parking and tolls, malpractice and health insurance premiums, fees for legal and accounting advice related to your work, licensing fees, and the cost to attend professional semi- nars and conventions (IRS, 2019d).
  fte APN must keep other trade-offs in mind when contemplating employment versus an independent contractor arrangement. Employers often provide cer- tain benefits to their employees (e.g., health insurance; pension plans; and paid personal time off for holidays, vacations, illnesses). ftese benefits are not made avail- able to independent contractors. Some organizations prefer to offer an independent contractor arrangement to an APN to avoid the cost of providing such benefits. If an APN wants or needs these kinds of benefits, an independent contractor arrangement is not advisable unless the APN is comfortable obtaining those benefits independently.

Factors Used to Determine Status
Because the liability, financial, and tax implications can be significant, it is important for APNs to understand the factors that determine whether an APN is an em- ployee or an independent contractor. A determination is based on the facts. fte IRS (2019b) considers common law and looks at the degree of control asserted by the organization versus the degree of independence main- tained by the worker. To determine whether an APN is an employee or an independent contractor from a fed- eral tax perspective, the IRS evaluates behavioral and financial controls and the type of relationship that exists between the APN and the organization for which the APN provides services. For examples of questions the IRS might ask, see Box 27.1.
State taxing authorities make similar inquiries for
state tax purposes. fte factors relied on by these taxing authorities can differ from those of the IRS and vary from state to state. Some states are more stringent than both the IRS and other states when classifying workers as employees versus independent contractors. ftus, it is important for an APN to be familiar with the federal bases used to distinguish between employee and inde- pendent contractor as well as the bases used by the states in which the APN practices. APNs should seek sound legal and accounting advice to address these issues.
   Failure to properly classify the work status of an APN can be costly to the organization if the APN is treated as an independent contractor but is, in fact, an employee. A case filed years ago by individuals who had been clas- sified as independent contractors rather than employees at Microsoft illustrates this and is still relevant today. Vizcaino v. Microsoft Corporation (1997) arose out of a tax audit of Microsoft conducted by the IRS. fte au- dit concluded that several of the individuals classified as independent contractors needed to be reclassified as em- ployees and the requisite taxes paid. fte IRS concluded that the individuals were employees because Microsoft controlled the manner and way in which the individu- als performed their services for the company. Microsoft ended up paying the required taxes and overtime that resulted from the reclassification, and it reclassified some of the individuals as permanent employees. Eight of these reclassified individuals demanded that they receive all the employment benefits they did not receive during



Box 27.1Questions to Evaluate Employment Status• What instructions does the organization give	various individuals? If so, the APN is likely to
to the APN? If the organization instructs the	be considered an independent contractor.
APN about when and where to work, the equip-	• How is the APN paid? Does the APN receive ment and supplies to be used, who will assist the		a set amount of pay over a certain period and APN, and what work must be performed (or		receive benefits from the organization, or is the even how the results are to be achieved by the		APN’s compensation based on a flat fee with- APN), these are factors that indicate the APN is		out the provision of benefits? fte former ar- employed by the organization.		rangement indicates an employment situation,
• Does the organization educate and train the		whereas the latter arrangement would suggest APN to perform services in accordance with		that the APN is an independent contractor. certain policies and procedures, or does the	• Does the APN realize a profit or take a loss? If APN have their own protocols for providing		so, it indicates that the APN is an independent services? fte former arrangement points to		contractor.
an employer–employee relationship. fte latter	• What type of relationship exists between the would indicate that the APN is an independent		organization and the APN? Is it for an indef- contractor.		inite period, or will it end on completion of a
• Does the APN have significant  fixed unre-	particular project? Is there a written contract imbursed business expenses (e.g., office rent,	that describes the type of relationship that exists? telephone and computer services, professional	(For example, if the contract is called an “em- dues, and support staff to pay) in connection	ployment agreement,” the employer–employee with providing services to the organization? If	relationship is obvious because it is specifically so, this generally indicates that the APN is an	stated within the agreement.) Does the APN re- independent contractor.	ceive benefits such as health insurance, a retire-
• Does the APN advertise, and are their services	ment plan, and paid time off? If so, it indicates
available to more than one organization or to	that the APN is an employee.

the time they were considered independent contractors, including participation in Microsoft’s 401(k) plan and employee stock purchase plan. Microsoft refused to issue these benefits, so the individuals sued the company. fte Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in Vizcaino ordered Mi- crosoft to provide employment benefits to its employees for the periods that those individuals had been errone- ously classified as independent contractors.
   Health-care workers too have challenged their classi- fication in order to obtain benefits. Trauma Nurses, Inc.
v. N.J. Dep’t. of Labor (1990) arose out of a nurse’s claim that she was an employee rather than an independent contractor of an agency. fte agency that provided her compensation was in the business of staffing hospitals in need of temporary nurses. fte nurse asserted that she

was an employee of the agency and entitled to state dis- ability benefits. Her claim was unsuccessful for a vari- ety of reasons. fte agency was not a provider of health care. It was in the business of assisting hospitals in need of temporary nursing services to supplement the ser- vices provided by permanent staff. Although the agency screened the nurses before placing them, other factors made it clear that the nurses were not employed by the agency. fte nurses were required to carry and pay for their own malpractice insurance and other types of cov- erage. ftey had to enter into a written contract with the agency that deemed them to be “independent” profes- sionals who were not controlled, directed, or supervised by the agency. In fact, the nurses negotiated their hourly rates and decided when, where, and how long they were



willing to work. ftey often worked for more than one hospital. ftey were independent contractors of the agency as well as the hospitals where they chose to work. A different decision was reached by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in Alexander v. FedEx Ground (2014), in which the court examined the many factors that Cal- ifornia considers in determining whether a worker is an independent contractor or an employee as a matter of law. fte court found that although the written agree- ments between FedEx and its drivers designated the workers as independent contractors, FedEx had a broad right to control the way the drivers performed their du- ties. In addition, drivers are not considered “profession-
als.” fte drivers were reclassified as employees.
   To this day, the courts rely on the decisions in these three cases—Vizcaino, Trauma Nurses, and Alexander— to decide whether a worker is an employee or an inde- pendent contractor.

The Advanced Practice Nurse as Employee
Employees working without a contract guaranteeing a specific position for a definite time at a designated pay rate are referred to as employees “at will.” In the past, this kind of employment arrangement allowed employers to terminate any at-will employee for any reason or for no reason. Although the general rule that an employee can be hired or fired for any reason or no reason con- tinues to exist, there now are many exceptions in place. ftese exceptions include public policy concerns, anti- discrimination laws, and whistleblower statutes. Both federal and state agencies protect employees’ rights. fte federal agencies include the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (https://www.eeoc.gov) that enforces antidiscrimination laws, the U.S. Department of Labor (https://www.dol.gov) that enforces the Fam- ily and Medical Leave Act, and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (https://www.osha.gov) that promotes safe working conditions for employees. ftus, employers no longer enjoy the unbridled latitude that the general rule of law previously afforded them.
Although the absence of job security continues to be an
issue for at-will employees, federal and state statutes have been enacted and judicial decisions have been made to en- sure that employers treat employees more fairly, regardless of the employee’s status as a contract or at-will employee.
  
One of the key limitations on an employer’s ability to terminate an employee at will is called the “public policy” exception. It is a judicially mandated exception that per- mits a terminated at-will employee to pursue a wrongful termination claim against the employer in cases where the employee has a reasonable basis to believe that he or she was terminated in violation of a clear mandate of public policy. Landin v. Healthsource Saginaw, Inc. (2014) is an example of such a case. Mr. Landin worked as a licensed professional nurse (LPN) at the hospital until he was terminated. He was an at-will employee who reported a coworker’s negligence that he believed caused the death of a patient. Mr. Landin alleged that the hospital retaliated against him and ultimately termi- nated him for reporting his concern. He filed a lawsuit claiming wrongful termination by the hospital. fte case was tried, and the jury awarded substantial damages to Mr. Landin. fte hospital appealed. fte Michigan Court of Appeals upheld the jury award and agreed that Mr. Landin’s actions warranted protection under the public policy exception.
Another whistleblower case that gained national at-
tention involved two Texas nurses employed by Winkler County Memorial Hospital. fte nurses were concerned about the incompetent practice of a physician who was treating patients at the hospital. ftey reported their con- cerns to hospital administration, and when the hospital failed to act, they reported the physician to the Texas Medical Board. fte hospital fired the nurses, who were also criminally prosecuted. ftey were charged with improperly releasing official hospital information to the medical board. fte charges against one nurse were dropped, and the other nurse was acquitted of wrong- doing at trial (Murray, 2011). fte nurses then sued the hospital, the physician, and others based on several claims, including wrongful termination, and recovered
$750,000.
   APNs practicing as employees have the opportunity, similar to Landin and the two Texas nurses, to pursue wrongful termination causes of action if they believe that adverse employment action was taken against them in violation of the common law public policy exception. In addition, many states and the federal government have adopted strong whistleblower statutes that enhance the common law protections available to employees. (fte protections afforded to employees under some of these



laws also have been extended to independent contractors but on a very limited basis.) Some of these laws have specific protections for health-care professionals. An example of such a statute is the New Jersey Conscien- tious Employee Protection Act (1986, as amended). It specifically prohibits employers from taking retaliatory action against health-care professionals, such as APNs, who disclose information about employers who provide improper patient care.
   Whistleblower claims alleging improper patient care are not always successful. Hitesman v. Bridgeway, Inc. (2014) is an example. Mr. Hitesman was employed as a registered nurse (RN) in a nursing home that also had a subacute unit. He claimed that there was a significant increase in the number of patients at the facility with respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms and was con- cerned about inadequate infection control. He brought his concerns to the attention of the medical and nursing directors but was dissatisfied with the facility’s response. He next reported his concerns anonymously to munic- ipal, county, and state agencies as well as the media. He released information to the media that the employer deemed a violation of its confidentiality policies and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996. Mr. Hitesman was terminated. He then sued the employer alleging violations of the Con- scientious Employee Protection Act (CEPA). He relied on the American Nurses Association (ANA) Code of Ethics, the employee handbook, and a statement of res- ident rights to support his case. fte trial court ruled in Mr. Hitesman’s favor, but the decision was reversed on appeal. fte appellate court found Mr. Hitesman’s reli- ance on the previously noted resources insufficient to establish that the employer had provided improper pa- tient care. fte New Jersey Supreme Court affirmed the appellate court’s decision. APNs who find themselves in situations that seem to require whistleblowing pursuant to law or the ANA Code of Ethics (2015a) should con- sider consulting an attorney familiar with this area of the law before acting.
Most recently, claims by nurses of inadequate infec-
tion control and other concerns in the face of COVID-19 have been widespread in the media. ftese reports high- light the importance of nurses, including APNs, who speak out about perceived concerns for the safety of their patients, their colleagues, and themselves.
  
Other statutory protections include a variety of anti- discrimination laws. ftere are several federal laws that protect workers from discrimination based on age, race/ ethnicity, sex/sexual orientation/gender identity, reli- gion, marital or family status, genetic information, and disability. Many states have their own laws as well. ftese laws continue to evolve and are the subject of much in- terpretation by the courts. Employees are afforded ad- ditional protections under federal and state laws that provide for unemployment benefits, payment for in- juries on the job (workers’ compensation), family and medical leave, and continuation of health-care benefits. APNs who work as employees should be aware of their many rights under these laws. Employers are required to advise their employees of these rights under certain circumstances.
Some APNs may have written employment contracts
that provide them with additional rights. Contractual issues are discussed in greater detail later in this chapter.

The Advanced Practice Nurse as Independent Contractor
An APN who is an independent contractor has a con- tract, which may be verbal, written, or implied, with another party to provide specific services. fte contract does not stipulate a level of behavioral and financial controls over the APN that would be associated with an employer–employee relationship. APNs working as inde- pendent contractors are not entitled to benefits that the organization provides to its employees. ftese APNs also would not be able to obtain unemployment compensa- tion, workers’ compensation, or family and medical leave protections through that organization if the need arose. ftis is because the legal relationship is not an employ- ment relationship. Of equal concern is the impact that potential professional liability claims would have on the APN who is an independent contractor. For example, APNs who are not employed by the hospital but have privileges there would be held individually responsible for their negligent acts that occur in the hospital.
fte case of Hansen v. Caring Professionals, Inc. (1997)
is illustrative. Although it does not involve an APN, it does involve a nurse; the issues presented in the case also would apply to APNs who work as independent con- tractors. fte case examines whether the nurse, who was



retained by Caring Professionals to provide temporary nursing services to a local hospital, was an employee or in- dependent contractor of that agency. fte distinction was fundamental in determining whether or not the agency could be held liable for the alleged negligent acts of the nurse. Mr. Hansen, the plaintiff in the case, claimed that a malpractice occurred when a central venous catheter that had been inserted into his wife’s jugular vein became dislodged. It was alleged that air entered the IV line and created an embolus that caused Mrs. Hansen sustained severe brain damage and total disability.
   Eileen Fajardo-Furlin, RN, was named as a defendant in the case because she cared for Mrs. Hansen while she was in the hospital. Ms. Fajardo-Furlin was working at the hospital on temporary assignment through Caring Professionals. Caring Professionals also was named as a defendant. fte patient’s husband sought to hold Car- ing Professionals responsible for the alleged negligence of Ms. Fajardo-Furlin. Caring Professionals sought to be removed from the case, asserting that there was no employee–employer relationship but rather an indepen- dent contractor relationship, thereby absolving Caring Professionals from any liability for the nurse’s actions. fte trial court agreed and dismissed Caring Profession- als from the case. An appeal followed, but the appellate court agreed with the trial court. Caring Professionals succeeded in getting removed from the case because Ms. Fajardo-Furlin was an independent contractor. fte nurse remained in the lawsuit as an individual defendant. ftis case illustrates how the type of working relationship that an APN has with an organization could have a signif- icant impact on the outcome of a negligence or mal- practice case. ftis case also illustrates the importance of having individual professional liability insurance. Nurse Fajardo-Furlin, as the only remaining defendant in the case, would be responsible for the cost of her legal fees and any judgment or settlement unless she carried her own malpractice policy.

CONTRACT ISSUES FOR APN EMPLOYEES AND INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS

APNs should have a basic understanding of contract law. It is often advisable and sometimes a require- ment for APNs to have written agreements in place to

address certain work and practice issues. fte remainder of this chapter introduces the APN to these types of considerations.

Types of Contracts
Contracts are promises or sets of promises that out- line the rights and responsibilities of the parties. ftey are legally binding, and if valid, they can be enforced. When one or more parties fails to perform in accordance with articulated rights and responsibilities, that failure is termed a breach. When a breach occurs, remedies out- lined in the agreement or contract are available to the nonbreaching party. In addition, when an agreement- related dispute is tried in the civil justice system or is the subject of binding arbitration, the nonbreaching party can obtain damages if a breach is found to have occurred. Contracts are usually categorized by the way in which they are formed. ftey can be express contracts, implied
contracts, or quasi-contracts.
• Express contracts are promises or sets of promises to which the parties agree either verbally or in writing.
• Implied contracts are promises or sets of promises
that are derived from the conduct of the parties to the contract.
• Quasi-contracts are not considered contracts per se,
but they are used by courts in some jurisdictions to al- low one or more parties to the quasi-contract to avoid unjust enrichment at the expense of the other party or parties. ftis is known as equitable relief.
   Some contracts, whether express or implied, are con- sidered invalid for various reasons. An invalid contract will not be enforced by the courts. An example of an invalid contract is one that is illegal because fulfilling its terms would be considered a crime. For instance, if an APN enters into a contract stating that he or she will receive financial incentives for referring patients to a health-care facility, this would be an anti-kickback vio- lation. Taking kickbacks for patient referrals is a crime; thus, a court would not enforce such a contract. fte contract is considered to have been void at its inception. Some contracts can be considered voidable. For example, if one of the parties to the contract is a minor or has a level of mental illness or dementia that prevented him or her from understanding the terms of the contract, the



contract is considered voidable by that party. Unenforce- able contracts are those that may be valid but not en- forced because of some defense that may be asserted by one or more parties to the contract. An example would be if a party were tricked into signing the contract or entered into the contract by mistake.
   For any contract to be enforced, the parties must have reached a “meeting of the minds” about its terms. When the parties have reached a meeting of the minds, the result is called mutual assent. Mutual assent is achieved when one party makes an offer and the other party un- equivocally accepts the offer. In addition to offer and acceptance, there must be an exchange of consideration for the contract to be valid. For example, an APN can enter into an employment contract with a physician practice. fte consideration received by the APN is mon- etary compensation. fte consideration received by the physician practice is the services that the APN provides to the practice.
Contracts can be unilateral or bilateral. A unilateral
contract is one in which there is no opportunity for ne- gotiation. An example of such a contract is a professional liability insurance policy. fte insurance company prom- ises to defend an APN in a malpractice case pursuant to the terms of the insurance policy in exchange for the payment of premiums by the APN. fte terms of the pol- icy (contract) are not negotiated. Once the APN pays the premium, the policy becomes effective. A bilateral contract is one in which the parties negotiate the terms. APNs often negotiate the terms of their agreements and should not be reluctant to do so, whether it is an em- ployment contract to obtain compensation and benefits that are acceptable or an independent contractor agree- ment to obtain satisfactory limitations on restrictive covenants.

Common Contractual Terms Included in Written Agreements
Agreements can be struck with a handshake or with the stroke of a pen. Agreements struck with a handshake, although honorable, may prove to be frustrating, un- workable, and largely unenforceable because many of the issues that normally are addressed in written agree- ments are not addressed in verbal agreements. In addi- tion, it is much easier to prove the terms of an agreement

that has been set down in writing. Written agreements can help the parties avoid the misunderstandings that may arise with implied or verbal contracts. ftus, it is recommended that APNs who enter into employment and independent contractor agreements do so in writing whenever possible.
   Written agreements can be brief, limited to just a few pages; or they can be lengthy, detailed documents. fte length and terms of the agreement depend on the spe- cific arrangements contemplated by the parties as well as their needs and preferences. Larger providers, such as extensive health-care systems, hospitals, and large med- ical practices, tend to enter into very lengthy, detailed agreements with the APN. Extensive negotiations may not be possible. Smaller providers tend to have shorter, more generalized agreements and are more flexible when the APN requests changes before agreeing to accept a contract.
Regardless of the length of an agreement, employ-
ment and independent contractor agreements for APNs routinely include certain terms. Among them are the scope of the contract; its effective date; the relation- ship and responsibilities of the parties; confidentiality; conflict of interest; compensation; indemnification and subrogation; dispute resolution; term, renewal, and ter- mination; remedies for breach; notices; modification and assignment of the agreement; severability; conflict of laws; legal authority; force majeure; covenant not to compete; and signatures. Each of these provisions are discussed.
Scope
fte section of a written agreement addressing scope re- cites the activities governed by the agreement. In this section, the services provided by the APN are identified. fte services may be stated broadly, or they may be listed individually. A broadly written scope statement for an APN might state that they agree to render services that are consistent with the scope of practice (SOP) articu- lated in the state’s nurse practice act (NPA) and in ac- cordance with all applicable national practice standards, such as the ANA’s Nursing: Scope and Standards of Prac- tice (2015b) or the practice standards that pertain to the APN’s specialty and type of certification. A more specific scope statement in a written agreement might delineate the APN’s job responsibilities and list the individual



services to be provided. In either event, it is important to verify that the services contemplated by the agreement fit within the APN’s SOP as defined by the state in which they practice.
Effective Date
fte section of a contract addressing the effective date will specify the date on which the agreement begins. It is also the date against which time frames identified in the agreement may be measured. For example, if the effective date of the agreement is July 1, 2021, and the APN is re- quired to provide a certain report to the other party every 90 days, the first report is due on October 1, 2021. fte effective date also is important in determining when the contract ends or when steps must be taken to renew the contract as discussed next.
Relationship of the Parties
In the relationship-of-the-parties section of the contract, the APN is identified as either an independent contractor or an employee. If the APN is going to be considered an independent contractor, it is important to keep that sta- tus in mind as other contractual provisions are written. Classifying an individual as an independent contractor but prescribing when, where, and how services will be performed may subject an organization to having that independent contractor reclassified as an employee. As previously discussed, this could expose an organization to liability for unpaid taxes and employment benefits as well as governmental penalties.
In situations in which an APN is going to function
in an independent contractor role, the contract should specifically state that the APN is not eligible for paid sick leave or vacation time, health insurance, retirement plans, and other benefits extended to the organization’s employees. An employee contract, on the other hand, should specifically include all the benefits to which the APN is entitled.
Responsibilities of the Parties
Once the relationship of the parties has been established, the responsibilities of each party can be more easily identified. Similar to other provisions, this section may be brief or quite lengthy, comprehensively listing what the expectations are of each party. If an APN is going to work as an independent contractor, it is imperative

that the APN maintain the decision-making ability with regard to the manner and means by which services will be provided to patients. In addition, the APN should contemplate adding a provision that they be consulted about any existing and future clinical practice guidelines that the organization may have or consider and be per- mitted to provide appropriate changes, if necessary, be- fore implementation.
   If an APN is identified as an independent contractor in the agreement and then is required to operate in a controlled manner proscribed by the other party, it is likely that the APN will be considered an employee, not an independent contractor. If, on the other hand, the agreement being executed is an employment contract, it is reasonable to identify when, where, and how the APN is to function.
   Typically, APNs practicing as independent contrac- tors have the responsibility to ensure that they are and remain properly credentialed; that they have adequate liability insurance; and that they perform contractual services in a manner that complies with professional practice and ethical standards as well as all applicable local, state, and federal regulations, statutes, and case law. However, APNs might consider including a con- tractual requirement that the organization with whom they are contracting assist with the credentialing and recredentialing process for area hospitals, managed care organizations (MCOs), third-party payers, and regula- tory agencies. In addition, APNs, whether employees or independent contractors, may be asked to promptly disclose any disciplinary actions taken against them. If a contract contains this type of provision, it is imperative that the APN understand their obligation to report and act promptly when the need arises. Otherwise, the fail- ure to report may be an event identified in the agreement that would permit immediate termination of the APN.
fte organization with which the APN is contracting
usually requires the APN’s assistance and cooperation with the collection of data to confirm the APN’s com- petency and proper credentialing. Required data may in- clude confirmation of educational preparation, specialty certifications, licensure, prior employment, status of existing and past practice privileges, liability insurance, malpractice claims, criminal background information, membership in professional associations, and compli- ance with the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)



and any state drug control agencies. In addition, APNs practicing as independent contractors may be asked to provide information regarding the types of client pop- ulations previously served, charges per encounter, visits per hour, visit frequency, incidence of diagnostic proce- dure use, admission and readmission rates, complication and mortality rates, outcomes, accessibility and availabil- ity history, appointment waiting times, and after-hours coverage history.
  fte responsibilities of APNs are delineated in writ- ten agreements; organizations with whom they contract should have their responsibilities delineated in the agree- ment as well. In that regard, it is the organization’s re- sponsibility to execute contracts that are consistent with the organizational bylaws. fte APN may explicitly re- quire that the organizational bylaws be incorporated into the agreement by reference and that the APN be pro- vided the most current edition of the bylaws. fte APN may be obligated to review the bylaws and written poli- cies of the organization periodically or whenever they are amended. fte APN may also negotiate involvement on bylaw committees or other organizational committees or panels.
It is also the organization’s responsibility to have
sound corporate compliance programs in place and to provide the APN with the information needed to pro- vide the agreed-to services. ftese and other organiza- tional responsibilities can be stated broadly or can be delineated specifically and in detail with set deadlines and penalties for failure to meet those deadlines.
Confidentiality
fte confidentiality section of a contract usually deals with information and documents that the parties wish to protect as confidential. fte responsibilities of the parties with regard to this information and these documents are also outlined. Some confidentiality provisions address an organization’s exclusive property right to medical, financial, and other records; specifically define what is protected; and contain strict prohibitions on accessing, reproducing, or removing certain information. Other confidentiality provisions simply state that confidential, proprietary, and trade-secret information shall not be disclosed to third parties without describing what infor- mation is considered to be confidential, proprietary, or a trade secret. If there are questions about what specific

information is protected, it is prudent to clarify this so that potential breaches of confidentiality are minimized. With regard to the privacy and confidentiality of pro- tected health information, many contracts now address the requirements of the Privacy Rule and Security Rule adopted by the federal government in 2003 and 2005, respectively. ftese rules are commonly referred to by health-care providers as HIPAA. fte protections under HIPAA were expanded with the passage of the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act of 2009 and the subsequent adoption of additional federal rules. ftese laws enhance the privacy and security protections of the electronic health records (EHRs) that have become prevalent in today’s health-care delivery systems. APNs must be fully familiar with the requirements that apply to them un- der these laws as well as the HIPAA and HITECH Act policies and procedures of the organizations with whom
they contract.
Conflict of Interest
Conflict-of-interest provisions are contained in written agreements in an effort to ensure that both parties are acting in the best interests of each other and promot- ing the mutual success of the relationship. Potentially conflicting loyalties can be problematic and should be avoided. Typically, conflict-of-interest provisions require the party who becomes aware of a potential conflict to promptly disclose it to the other party. When these pro- visions are included in an APN’s written agreement, it is important for the APN to act in a manner that avoids potential conflicts and is not contrary to the contrac- tual requirements, such as always acting in the best in- terest of the patients and not in the best interest of any other third party. Health-care entities often have written conflict-of-interest policies, and the APN should be fully familiar with the policy. For instance, an APN may be required to disclose if they are practicing elsewhere, have an ownership interest in a medical device company, or have an investment in the pharmaceutical industry.
Compensation
Compensation provisions in written agreements delin- eate the payment that will be rendered once agreed-to services are provided. fte sum may be listed as a total amount of money that will be paid over the course of the



contract, or it may be listed as an incremental amount, paid according to established benchmarks. Caps may be identified that limit the total amount of money that will be paid as well as any bonus payments. With regard to bonus payments, it is important to decide whether bo- nus payments will be based on profit that is generated from the services provided by the APN, the productivity of the APN, the quality of care given by the APN, or some combination thereof. Not only does the APN need to decide whether or not bonus payments are going to be incorporated into the written agreement, a great deal of attention needs to be paid to the formula used to cal- culate bonus payments. It is important to be sure that the formulas used are reasonable, are regularly audited, and do not benefit one party more than the other. Care should be taken to avoid financial incentives that may be viewed as kickbacks or otherwise illegal.
In addition, health-care organizations, plans, and
practice groups will likely include a statement conveying that it is the responsibility of the APN practicing as an independent contractor to pay all taxes associated with contracted services.
   APNs executing written agreements need to consider adding specific dates on which payments will be made. When those payments are not forthcoming, a late fee can be imposed so long as it is included in the agreement. Ad- ditionally, when the compensation for the APN is based on billing receipts, the APN should be provided with ongoing documentation tracking the billing process and reimbursement levels from each payer, including second- ary sources and previously denied claims. Time frames within which claims will be processed should be set, and penalties for failure to meet those time frames should be negotiated.
Indemnification and Subrogation
Indemnification and subrogation issues are typically addressed in written agreements. Indemnification is a promise between the parties to hold each party harmless for the wrongdoing of the other party. For example, an APN may enter into a contract with a physician practice as an independent contractor. fte contract will contain language that says the APN is responsible for their own wrongdoings. If a malpractice claim occurs for which the APN is solely responsible, it is the APN who must bear the loss associated with that claim. fte APN must

indemnify the physician practice. fte contract will also contain language that requires the APN to carry their own insurance coverage and provide proof of it. It is important to ensure that an indemnification provision is reciprocal so that both parties are extended the same level of protection. fte APN should be indemnified by the physician practice if someone other than the APN is responsible for a malpractice or other type of claim.
   Subrogation, on the other hand, permits the substi- tution of one party for another. In health-care matters, the doctrine of subrogation has been used by health-care facilities to recover from the APN the monetary losses sustained after the health-care organization is found lia- ble for the negligence or malpractice of the APN or other individual to whom the APN delegated any aspect of care or treatment. Similar to indemnification, a subro- gation provision will likely be included in certain con- tracts. If it is, the APN should be sure that the provision is reciprocal so that both parties to the contract have a right to subrogation.
Dispute Resolution
Dispute resolution provisions describe the process to be used when the parties disagree about any aspect of the contract. Usually, this provision states that both parties will use their best efforts to promptly resolve all disagree- ments. In situations in which the disagreement cannot be resolved, there may be a requirement for the parties to submit the dispute to mediation or arbitration as alter- native dispute resolution mechanisms. fte parties to the contract may negotiate terms that require either bind- ing or nonbinding dispute resolution. If there is binding arbitration, for example, the parties to the contract are waiving their rights to file a lawsuit in the event one of the parties is dissatisfied with the arbitrator’s decision. If the parties agree to a nonbinding dispute resolution process, it is important to state that the process must be concluded before filing a cause of action in court.
Term, Renewal, and Termination
Term, renewal, and termination provisions in written agreements specify the length of the contract, usually in months or years, as well as the process for renewing and terminating the agreement. Renewal clauses typically re- quire one or both parties to notify the other party within a certain period of their intention to renew the contract.



Some written agreements approach the issue differently by providing for automatic renewal for a specific period if one party does not notify the other of its intent to not renew the agreement.
   Termination provisions in written agreements usually require the terminating party to notify the other party within a specific period, usually 60 or 90 days, of that party’s intent to terminate the agreement. Agreements may be terminated with or without cause, and severance payment may or may not be incorporated into the agree- ment. “Termination without cause” provisions permit the APN to be terminated for any reason or no reason, so long as the termination is not unlawful. Sometimes courts consider “termination without cause” provisions in written agreements to be insufficient or unenforce- able, thereby permitting the terminated party to pursue a claim of wrongful termination in violation of public policy. ftis is especially true if the terminated party is characterized as a whistleblower who reported an al- legedly illegal practice and was subsequently notified of the termination of the agreement.
If a “termination without cause” provision is going to
be included in the written agreement, it must be recip- rocal, permitting the APN to terminate the agreement for any reason or no reason within a comparable period. APNs, similar to other parties to written agreements, need to be sure that their decision to terminate an agree- ment is lawful.
   Not only may agreements be terminated without cause, they may be terminated with cause. An event giv- ing rise to termination with cause usually results in the immediate dissolution of the contract. Terminations for cause are typically limited to instances in which the APN commits a crime, breaches his or her fiduciary duty to the organization, is disciplined by his or her professional board, or acts in a manner that potentially compromises the standing of the organization in the community. ftese provisions may also be stated more broadly by permit- ting “for cause” termination with any illegal occurrence. Similar to termination without cause provisions, termi- nation of the agreement “for cause” may be exercised by an APN, so long as an identifiable “for cause” event has occurred and the agreement permits termination. It is, therefore, important to ensure that termination clauses are reciprocal and that the APN articulates the occur- rence of those events that would permit the APN to

terminate the agreement as well as the financial conse- quences for each party if the agreement is terminated.
Remedies for Breach
Written agreements usually identify the remedy, or con- sequence, of breaching, or failing to perform, the terms of the agreement. In an attempt to limit the circum- stances that can give rise to a breach and to establish the amount of money to be paid because of a breach (known as liquidated damages), one party may attempt to define the specific circumstances that would create a breach of contract. An example would be one party’s fail- ure to provide the other party with proof of insurance. In situations in which a specific definition of breach is acceptable to the APN, it is important to ensure that the limited definition is reciprocal and that each party be given a reasonable opportunity to “cure” the breach. fte APN should pay particular attention to any liqui- dated damages clause in the contract. fte financial con- sequences of such a clause can be devastating if a breach cannot be cured and the liquidated damages clause is triggered.
Notices
fte notices clause in written agreements identifies the in- dividuals who are to receive notice from the other party. fte clause contains specific contact information for each of the individuals listed. fte provision also outlines the process, such as certified mail, to be used when notifying the other party of any occurrence requiring notification, such as a decision to renew the contract for an additional term. It is important that the notification information be current so that the proper individuals are apprised of any communication between the parties to the agreement.
Modification
Modification provisions in written agreements permit the parties to modify the terms of the agreement with- out having to execute a new contract. For multiyear con- tracts, modification clauses are important because they permit an APN to renegotiate the compensation package or any other aspect of the agreement on an annual or other agreed-to basis. Any specific term of the contract may be modified so long as the modification provision states that the contract may be modified at any time and as long as both parties agree to the modification.



Modifications invariably must be in writing and signed by all parties to the contract. Sometimes modification provisions will specify only certain components of the agreement that can be modified. Before executing an agreement, it is important for the APN to understand which terms of the agreement are subject to modifica- tion and, if necessary, negotiate for the right to modify additional terms before signing. Typically, modifications that occur during the term of the contract accompany the agreement in written form and are attached to the agreement as addendums.
Assignment
Assignment provisions in written agreements either permit or prohibit the assignment of the contract from one of the parties to another individual or entity. When assignment is permitted, one party may pass a contract on to a third party. ftat third party then as- sumes the responsibility for performing in accordance with the terms of the contract. On the other hand, when assignment is prohibited, the agreement cannot be transferred to another party. Often, if an APN is contracting with an entity, the entity will want the ability to assign the contract to another entity or sub- contractor (such as a hospital or group practice) but will be unwilling to allow an APN to assign the con- tract to another APN.
Severability
Severability clauses help to keep uncontested and en- forceable provisions of the written agreement in effect. Sometimes one specific provision of an agreement is disputed and deemed unenforceable. For example, a provision in the contract that requires the APN to re- fer patients to a clinical laboratory, imaging center, or durable medical equipment (DME) company owned by one of the physicians in the group practice where the APN works may violate federal or state self-referral laws. Such a provision could be severed from the agree- ment without voiding the entire contract. Another ex- ample is a restrictive covenant provision that excludes an APN from working within an unreasonably large geographic area after leaving a practice. A court is likely to find such a provision to be illegal. A severability clause permits the rest of the contract to remain in full force.

Conflict of Laws
fte conflict-of-laws clause in a written agreement iden- tifies the jurisdiction within which the agreement was executed and the jurisdiction that governs contractual disputes that may arise. It is important for APNs to know which jurisdictions apply. For example, if an APN is contracting with a health-care facility that is owned by a company located in another state, the APN may be subject to that other state’s laws if a dispute arises. Sometimes this clause will require the APN to seek relief in the other state’s court system rather than the court system of the state where the APN is located. ftese types of provisions are becoming more prevalent as health-care systems, facilities, and group practices continue to con- solidate with other systems, facilities, and practices— sometimes on a national scale. ftis trend can make it quite difficult for the APN to obtain remedies if there is a breach of the contract. ftis presents a significant strategic disadvantage to the APN if a legitimate dispute arises. Such a provision is often non-negotiable.
Legal Authority
fte legal authority section of a written agreement states that the parties to the agreement have the authority to enter into the arrangement. ftis provision ensures that only the individuals with the authority to bind the par- ties are participating in the negotiation and execution of the written agreement. It also ensures that the parties are not violating some other contract by entering into a new agreement. For example, if an APN is subject to a valid covenant not to compete under the terms of a prior agreement with another practice, they may not have the legal authority to enter into a subsequent agreement with another practice located within the geographical area at issue.
Force Majeure
fte force majeure clause of a written agreement ensures that the contract will not be considered to be breached in situations in which an “act of God” prohibits one party from performing in accordance with the terms of the agreement. “Acts of God” include natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, tornados, and hurricanes as well as human disasters such as wars, terrorist acts, riots, and even pandemics such as COVID-19. A force majeure clause has the effect of putting the performance



requirements of the contract on hold until performance can be reasonably resumed.
Covenant Not to Compete and Other Restrictions
Covenants not to compete limit an APN’s ability to en- ter into other ventures that would compete with the “in- terests” of the organization, plan, or practice group with whom they are contracting. Typically, covenants not to compete are time limited and may contain geographi- cal limitations. ftat is, an APN may be prohibited from entering into other ventures that directly or indirectly compete with the other party for a certain period, such as 2 years, after the contract terminates. fte prohibition also may be limited to a certain geographical radius, such as a 10-mile radius from the location of the other party. ftis type of limitation is meant to protect the organiza- tion or practice group from direct competition by the APN, who could otherwise open a practice in the same general location and take business from the other party. When a covenant not to compete is included in an independent contractor or employment agreement, it is important for the APN to know what organizations or entities the other party considers to be within the scope of the covenant not to compete. ftis is especially im- portant if the organizations or entities have multiple locations and the covenant includes a geographical re- striction. It is also important to clarify what the other party means by the word interests to limit the applicable period to as narrow a time frame as possible; to limit the geographical restraints; and, if possible, to include a specific sum of money that will be received by the APN for agreeing not to compete. Often the agreement will include a requirement to pay liquidated damages if the APN violates a covenant not to compete. Each state has laws that govern whether a restrictive covenant is en- forceable or not. A few states prohibit restrictive cove- nants altogether as a matter of law or strictly limit their use. fte APN should keep in mind that these laws vary
from state to state.
   Also, in exchange for retaining this covenant in an agreement, an APN should give serious consideration to requiring the other party to execute an exclusive agree- ment that would not allow the other party to contract with other APNs. Alternatively, the APN might ask for the right of first refusal on all projects and referrals for which the APN is qualified. An example might be the

closure of a pain management clinic because of lack of funding and termination of the APN who functioned as staff with subsequent reopening of the same service on receiving new grant monies. On reopening, the pain management clinic would give the APN the right of first refusal for rehiring.
   ftere are often other restrictions in written agree- ments that may survive the contract. For example, there will likely be prohibitions that prevent an APN from releasing, taking, or using confidential or proprietary information from a practice, such as patient lists and treatment records, as well as specific forms and market- ing strategies developed by the organization. ftere may also be a provision that prevents the APN from directly or indirectly soliciting, hiring, or recruiting others from the practice for a specific period after the termination of an agreement. ftese types of provisions often impose liquidated damages if violated.
Signatures
fte signatures section of a written agreement is the place where the parties sign and date the document. After the parties sign the agreement, it is considered to be exe- cuted. An agreement that is executed signifies that the parties have reached a meeting of the minds and that both parties intend to interact with each other in accor- dance with the terms of the contract.

Other Provisions to Consider Including in Written Agreements
Although most written agreements contain some combi- nation of the provisions previously identified, there are contemporary issues that may need to be addressed by APNs as well. ftose issues include the proprietary rights of the parties and incentives as well as the frequency with which clinical practice guidelines and collaborative prac- tice agreements will be negotiated.
   Proprietary rights of the parties should be discussed by the parties considering entering into a contractual business relationship. It is important to clarify who owns all tangible and intangible property at the beginning of the business relationship so that issues regarding owner- ship interests can be explored and restrictions on use, if any, can be articulated. Tangible personal property might include equipment, supplies, or furnishings. Intangible



property, on the other hand, includes things such as in- tellectual property and goodwill. In situations in which these issues have been addressed during the negotiation period, the parties are clear about what property they each own and the expectations regarding the use of that property during the term of the contract and once the agreement expires or is terminated.
   With regard to incentives, it may be appropriate for APNs to consider including legal incentives that are based on the achievement of quality outcomes. Quality outcomes that might be used as incentives include, but are not limited to, patient satisfaction, length of stay, re- duced mortality and readmission rates, and adherence to recommended clinical regimens. It is important, how- ever, for APNs to avoid agreeing to participate in any incentive arrangement that is based on schemes to ac- quire new patients in which the APN knowingly receives inducements. Incentive arrangements that fit into this category include any agreement to pay the APN for re- ferring patients to specific providers. Engaging in these kinds of activities exposes health-care professionals to fraud and abuse allegations and to breach of fiduciary duty causes of action.
Health-care providers are experiencing the conse-
quences associated with these problems. fte Office of Inspector General–U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (OIG-HHS) reported that the federal government obtained $2.6 billion in health-care fraud judgments and settlements in 2019 for alleged kickbacks and false claims—a figure that does not include recov- ered state Medicaid funds (OIG-HHS, 2020). APNs should be careful to avoid contracts and activities that the government might view as fraudulent. In one case, a Texas nurse was sentenced to prison for participating in a kickback scheme with a DME company. fte DME company paid the nurse 10% of the Medicare pay- ments it received for each patient the nurse referred to it (OIG-HHS, 2011). fte outcome would be the same if the nurse were an APN who had an employment or independent contractor agreement that included a pro- vision for the APN to receive a certain percentage for each patient referred. In another case, a New York health center was up-coding services provided by APNs for psychiatric emergency department visits. fte visits were routinely billed as physician services (OIG-HHS, 2018). APNs need to be vigilant and avoid these and other types

of arrangements that may be characterized as kickbacks or otherwise illegal.
   Investigations are on the rise, and there is now an Opioid Fraud and Abuse Detection Unit. Its mission is to combat the opioid crisis that has gripped this country by prosecuting those engaged in fraud related to opioid prescriptions (OIG-HHS, 2020). One task force in the detection unit charged multiple defendants, including eight APNs, for health-care fraud involving illegal opioid and other drug prescriptions (OIG-HHS, 2019).

Avoiding Legal Pitfalls Associated With Written Agreements
Written agreements are executed in an effort to estab- lish the ground rules that the parties agree to follow. Sometimes, however, these agreements are the subject of litigation. Usually, in litigation arising out of a writ- ten agreement executed between two parties, one party alleges that the other has breached the contract and should pay damages to the nonbreaching party. In other instances, one party may attempt to argue that the con- tract should be deemed illegal or that certain provisions of the contract should be disregarded.
  fte case that follows is illustrative of some of the contractual terms previously discussed in this chapter as well as some problems that APNs may encounter in situations involving written agreements. Washington County Memorial Hospital v. Sidebottom (1999) involves a nurse practitioner (NP) who entered into an employ- ment agreement with a rural Missouri hospital in 1993. fte employment agreement contained a covenant not to compete during the term of the agreement and for
1 year following the termination of the agreement. fte covenant applied to the geographical area within a 50-mile radius of the hospital. fte NP could not “di- rectly or indirectly engage in the practice of nursing [elsewhere] without the express direction or consent” of the hospital. In February 1994, the NP was still employed at the hospital and asked for permission to provide prenatal care for the county health department. fte hospital was not providing prenatal care for its pa- tients at the time and allowed the NP to provide the care for the county. However, the hospital reserved the right to rescind its permission if it offered prenatal ser- vices in the future.



   fte employment agreement terminated in 1996, and the NP and the hospital entered into a new employment agreement that had a term of 2 years. fte second agree- ment contained the same covenant not to compete. It also provided for an additional 2-year term unless either party provided written notice of termination at least 90 days before its expiration in 1998. fte agreement also gave the parties the right to review the NP’s compensa- tion at set intervals.
   During the course of the second employment agree- ment, there were some discussions between the parties about increasing the NP’s compensation. In January 1998, the hospital unilaterally gave the NP a 3% salary increase, which the NP considered to be unfair, although she did sign a modification to the agreement concern- ing the increase. fte NP resigned a few months later and immediately began employment with a physician practice that was located within the 50-mile radius of the hospital. fte hospital went to court and obtained a temporary restraining order. fte NP immediately had to stop working for the physician practice. ftereafter, the court issued a permanent restraining order prohibiting the NP from practicing within the 50-mile radius for 1 year from the effective date of her resignation.
fte NP appealed and argued that the court should
not enforce the covenant “because there was no threat of significant patient loss” to the hospital. However, the appellate court found the geographical limitations and time frame of the covenant to be reasonable and protec- tive of the hospital’s patient base, which was the source of its revenue. fte court noted that the hospital had helped the NP get established in the community by setting up two clinics, advertising her services, and providing her with the support necessary to maintain her practice.
  fte NP also argued that the hospital materially breached the employment agreement by unilaterally amending the contract with a salary increase without the NP’s review or any negotiations. fte appellate court re- jected this argument as well and found that the hospital had acted in good faith by giving the NP an increase equal to a cap it had imposed on salary increases for all employees at the time. fte court required the NP to pay for the hospital’s costs of the appeal. Had the hospital offered proof of other financial damages from loss of pa- tients because of the NP’s violation of the covenant, the court would have awarded those damages as well.
  
Had the court agreed that the hospital breached the employment contract by unilaterally amending it before the NP violated the covenant, the NP would not have been subject to the covenant not to compete. fte cove- nant would have been unenforceable, and the court would have allowed the NP to continue to practice within the geographical area excluded by the contract. Likewise, if this case had arisen in a state where restrictive covenants are prohibited by law, the noncompete language would have been stricken by the court, and the NP would have remained employed with the physician practice.

SUMMARY


Traditionally, nurses have practiced as employees and not independent contractors. However, more and more APNs are embarking on private practice careers and pursuing entrepreneurial opportunities that require the protections of a written agreement. In addition, more and more APNs and their employers are entering into written contracts to define their rights and responsibil- ities. Because executing written agreements governing the working relationship between the APN and another party is now commonplace, it is important to understand the basic, foundational issues that need to be addressed in written agreements. ftis chapter has identified several of those issues.
Although written agreements can provide APNs with
great flexibility and autonomy, they can also result in the APN rather than the health-care organization being held liable for alleged acts of negligence. In addition, the terms included in written agreements may be the focus of litigation themselves. Cases discussed in this chapter demonstrate how some courts have addressed these is- sues. In light of the principles discussed in this chap- ter, it is important for APNs to ensure that agreements regarding their status as employee or independent con- tractor be memorialized in writing. In addition, these written agreements need to be carefully reviewed for compliance with federal and state laws and regulations to avoid any legal concerns, including those related to health-care fraud, and to ensure that the written agree- ment accurately reflects the mutual assent of the parties. APNs should seriously consider obtaining legal advice to protect their interests.















The Law, the Courts,
and the Advanced Practice Nurse
David M. Keepnews

The author wishes to express his deep appreciation to Kammie Monarch, JD, RN, whose significant contributions to prior versions of this chapter are reflected in this version.




Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Understand the various sources of law.
• Describe the relationship between the law, legislation, and regulation.
• Distinguish between federal and state responsibility for health-care laws.
• Summarize the rule-making process.
• Justify the functions of the courts.
• Describe the structure of the U.S. court system.
• Explain the role of precedent in the U.S. legal system.
• Illustrate legal scope of practice (SOP) issues.
• Explain fraud and abuse.
• Clarify antitrust law and its relevance to health professional practice.






483



INTRODUCTION

fte focus of this chapter is to highlight several areas of the law that directly affect the role and practice of advanced practice nurses (APNs). It gives an overview of the sources of law in the United States, explains how the judicial branch of government works, and discusses some specific areas of law that guide all APNs in their daily practices. ftis chapter does not directly address is- sues related to negligence and malpractice because they are addressed separately in Chapter 29.

THE BROAD CONTEXT FOR LAW

Sources of Law
fte legal environment for nursing practice is derived from a number of sources, including legislation that governs and otherwise affects practice; regulations that implement legislation; and the decisions of courts that interpret and enforce laws, including both legislation and regulation.

Legislation
Much of the legal context for advanced nursing prac- tice originates in statutes—that is, in legislation passed in Congress and in state legislatures. Legislation defines the legal authority for practice; legal responsibilities of practitioners; many of the penalties for failing to live up to those legal responsibilities; and other critical aspects of practice, including reimbursement.
   Under the U.S. system of government, different re- sponsibilities fall to the state legislatures and to Congress. Under this system of federalism, among the responsibili- ties of Congress is to vote on legislation that involves the use of federal funds, relates to issues that span across state boundaries, or affects commerce between states. fte states have authority over a large number of health-care issues. State legislatures define licensure requirements for health-care professionals, hospitals, and other health-care organizations. States also determine issues related to the scope of practice (SOP) of APNs and other health professionals—these include major issues such as the scope of APN prescriptive authority and whether APNs must practice in collaboration with physicians.
  
In theory, Congress passes laws that deal with national or federal issues, whereas most other issues—including most health-care issues—are reserved for the states to address. In practice, this line has become increasingly difficult to draw. For example, the Medicare program was created by federal legislation in 1965; Medicare funding, financing, eligibility, coverage, and reimburse- ment are all governed by federal law. But to qualify for reimbursement, services by an APN or other provider must be within their SOP, which is determined by each state. Medicare also requires that APN services be pro- vided in collaboration with a physician; this requirement applies even in states that do not require collaboration or supervision in order to practice. Although states are responsible for regulating hospitals and other health-care organizations, such organizations must be in compliance with Medicare requirements, including Medicare con- ditions of participation (COPs), in order to be eligible for payment by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). fte states have traditionally been re- sponsible for regulating health insurance, but Congress has determined that many insurance issues are areas of national concern. Accordingly, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA)—the federal health re- form law enacted in 2010—set out a framework for state health insurance exchanges, created new regulations for participating health insurance plans, and requires most large employers to provide health insurance or pay a penalty.
As originally enacted, the ACA also required that
individuals not covered by their employer or a govern- ment health-care program purchase insurance or pay a penalty. Opponents of the ACA have argued that this requirement exceeded the authority of Congress—that only the states had the authority to mandate individu- als to purchase health insurance. In National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius (2012), the Supreme Court of the United States upheld the individual man- date, finding that Congress’s power to levy taxes gave it the authority to require that individuals failing to pur- chase health insurance pay a penalty. Subsequently, as part of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, Congress voted to eliminate that penalty. Several states then challenged the individual mandate again, arguing that because the penalty had been eliminated, there is no longer a consti- tutional basis for the individual mandate. ftey  further



argued that the individual mandate is so central to the ACA that the entire law should be invalidated. As of this writing, that case, California v. Texas, is awaiting a deci- sion by the Supreme Court.
   Generally speaking, when Congress acts in a given area, it overrides conflicting state law or may override any state laws in the same area—a doctrine known as preemption. For instance, the federal Employee Re- tirement Income Security Act of 1974 preempts some state laws regulating employee benefit plans, including employer-provided health insurance. ftis has had the ef- fect of exempting self-insured plans (in which employers bear their own insurance risk directly) from state regula- tion. It also has had the effect of preempting state courts’ ability to try many damage suits based on damages al- legedly caused by the actions of an employer-provided health plan.
In some instances, however, both Congress and the
states may act—either because Congress explicitly allows the states to act or because Congress and the states ad- dress different aspects of the same issue. For example, the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act addresses health and safety issues of employees. However, Section 18(b) of that act allows states to regulate workplace safety and health if it submits a plan to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and receives its ap- proval. Both Congress and many state legislatures have enacted antitrust laws, which address anticompetitive marketplace activity. Although Congress has strength- ened and broadened federal laws on health-care fraud and abuse, including fraudulent and abusive activities directed against private health insurers, states also have laws that address health-care fraud and abuse.
Government Agency Rulemaking
fte actions of federal and state government agencies have a critical role to play in health care, including the practice of APNs. fte rules and regulations they issue have the force of law.
   In the United States, government is divided into three branches: legislative, executive, and judicial. Under this framework, the legislature passes laws, the executive branch implements them, and the judicial branch inter- prets them when controversies arise.
   fte executive branch is headed by a chief executive— the president at the federal level; the governor at the

state level. It includes a number of different agencies that administer the day-to-day workings of the government. ftey are headed by officials who report to the president or governor and who generally are appointed by them. ftese agencies cover all areas of government. In health care, relevant federal agencies include the U.S. Depart- ment of Health and Human Services (USDHHS) and agencies within it, such as the CMS, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the National Institutes of Health (NIH). But many other agencies have an impact on health care and health professionals in one way or another—the U.S. Department of Labor, the Depart- ment of Defense, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and others.
ftese agencies act based on the authority given to
them through Congress (for federal agencies) or the state legislatures (for state agencies). A common explanation of these agencies’ responsibilities is that they implement legislation. ftis description is accurate, but it may be deceptively simple. Implementation may involve a range of activities, from operationalizing a clear legislative mandate, to filling in complex details in a legislatively developed program, to acting on its own initiative based on a long-standing, broad grant of legislative authority.
  fte following examples may help illustrate the dif- ferences between each of these types of executive agency action.
   Suppose that in one hypothetical state, nursing or- ganizations have lobbied for full practice authority for APNs. After facing opposition from physician groups, they agree to legislation authorizing APNs to prescribe drugs without physician supervision or collaboration. fte relevant part of this legislation might read as follows:
1. An advanced practice nurse (APN) shall be authorized to write prescriptions for drugs, regardless of class of drug, provided that the APN:
a. Is certified by a national accrediting body recog- nized by the National Commission for Certifying Agencies or the American Board of Nursing Spe- cialties; and
b. Has successfully completed 100 hours of coursework in pharmacology offered by an accredited school of nursing, either as part of an educational program



leading to preparation as an APN or subsequent to completing such program.
2. The board of nursing shall establish and maintain a mechanism for ensuring that APNs meet the above re- quirements before prescribing drugs.
3. The board of nursing shall maintain a list of APNs who are qualified to prescribe drugs and shall make this list available to the board of pharmacy.
4. A licensed pharmacist, upon being presented with a valid prescription written by an APN who is quali- fied to prescribe drugs, shall fill such prescription in the same manner as a prescription written by any other qualified prescriber.
5. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requir- ing physician supervision of prescriptions or pre- scribing practice of an APN who has met the above requirements.
   To implement this change in the law, the state board of nursing (BON) and state board of pharmacy might propose amendments to their regulations. fte BON’s regulations would include a process for tracking and ver- ifying completion of required pharmacology coursework and for maintaining a list of APNs who are authorized to prescribe. fte board of pharmacy might amend its reg- ulations to reflect the fact that the law authorizes phar- macists to fill prescriptions written by advanced practice registered nurses (APRNs).
  ftis is the simplest form of implementation— providing a mechanism to operationalize a clear legis- lative mandate. Imagine that the law had been written differently and instead reads as follows:
An advance practice nurse (APN) shall be authorized to prescribe drugs, provided that the APN has completed coursework in pharmacology, in accordance with standards and mechanisms determined by the board of nursing.
  ftis law is much less precise. How much course- work do APRNs need in order to prescribe? Where can they obtain this coursework—must it be from a school of nursing, or can it be provided by another continu- ing education provider? What other standards should be included—should there be restrictions based on the APN’s area of expertise or certification? Are pharmacists required to fill prescriptions written by APNs? What role

(if any) will physicians have related to APN prescribing? ftese are all issues that would be left to the BON to address when it proposes and issues regulations.
   Why would a state legislature adopt a law that is so sparse on details? Perhaps it was the result of a failure to reach consensus on the details among in- terest groups and legislators and an agreement to let those details be worked out in regulation. Or, as is often the case, perhaps legislators preferred to leave it to the relevant government agency to set appropriate standards, based on the belief that legislators lack the expertise (or time) to debate whether 75, 100, or 200 hours of pharmacology coursework is appropriate, but that the government agency charged with regulating nursing practice is in a better position to make such a determination.
ftis type of scenario—the legislature enacting legis-
lation that leaves it to a government agency to determine major details—is fairly common. When Congress passed the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) in 1996, it included requirements for safe- guarding the privacy of health information. It was left to DHHS to develop and promulgate rules that spell out the mechanisms for implementing and enforcing stan- dards for doing so. When Congress expanded the scope of Medicare reimbursement for APNs as part of the Bal- anced Budget Act (BBA) of 1997, it was up to DHHS (and, specifically, to the Health Care Financing Admin- istration, now the CMS) to address important questions such as who would qualify for reimbursement and how statutory requirements that APNs work in collaboration with a physician would be implemented.
fte ACA introduced several important new measures
to expand access to health-care coverage, curb abusive practices by some insurers, and expand primary care and preventive services, among many others. Many of the provisions of the ACA required DHHS and in some cases other agencies, including the Department of Labor and the Internal Revenue Service, to issue implementing rules.
   Sometimes government agencies act under a broad scope of authority that has been granted to them in a specific area by Congress or a state legislature, rather than in response to a recent legislative mandate. A state health department may be granted the authority to es- tablish licensing standards for hospitals, for instance.



After initially establishing regulations containing stan- dards for licensure, the agency may subsequently decide to revise those standards as part of its broad mandate to protect the public’s health.

The Court System
What Courts Do
Courts administer justice by applying laws to controver- sies. Facts are determined, the law is applied to those facts, and a decision is rendered. Civil courts adjudicate controversies between individual parties and address the rights of the parties. Parties in these matters are referred to as plaintiffs and defendants. Plaintiffs are the suing party, and defendants are the party defending the action filed against them. Criminal courts, on the other hand, are charged with administering criminal laws and deter- mining penalties for wrongs against society. In a criminal action, the government prosecutes a defendant (or mul- tiple defendants).
Structure of the U.S. Court System: Federal and State
In the United States, there is a federal court system and each state has its own court system. In state-based civil proceedings, breach of contract; negligence; and malpractice causes of action are typically heard as well as domestic relations, real estate, probate, and other state-specific  matters.  ftese  cases  may  or  may  not be heard by a jury, but they are always overseen by judges.
   In most states, the party losing the case at the trial court level has the opportunity to appeal the matter to an appellate court. States use different names for this level of court, but they all are considered intermediate appellate courts. Generally, these courts are referred to as courts of appeals. Cases coming before a court of appeals are not retried. Generally, appellate judges determine whether or not the trial was properly conducted and/ or whether the right law was correctly applied. After re- viewing the trial court record, the court of appeals may affirm, modify, reverse, or remand the judgment made at the trial court level. Affirming the trial court decision upholds the original determination made in the matter. Modifying the trial court decision changes the decision in some way. Reversing the decision of the trial court

results in nullifying it. Remanding the decision results in the case being sent back to the trial court.
   fte losing party at the appellate court level may have the opportunity to appeal the matter to the state’s high court. (ftat course is known as the state supreme court in most states but may go by different names in other states. For example, the high court in New York State is the court of appeals.) Cases that raise federal constitu- tional issues may be appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. Unlike the varied nature of the state court systems, the federal court system is uniform. Entry-level trial courts are federal district courts. ftere are 94 federal districts located in each U.S. state and territory. Larger states are divided into two, three, or four federal districts. ftese district courts are presided over by appointed fed- eral district judges. Federal district courts hear both civil and criminal matters. Among cases tried in federal courts are cases that raise issues related to the U.S. Constitu- tion or federal laws, those in which the United States is a party, disputes between states, and disputes between cit- izens of different states if a minimum amount (currently
$75,000) is in dispute.
   After a judge in a federal district court has rendered a decision, the losing party may appeal that decision to a federal court of appeal (also referred to as a circuit court). ftere are 13 such courts in the United States. fte losing party at this level may request to appeal the decision to the U.S. Supreme Court.
   fte U.S. Supreme Court is located in Washington, DC, and is composed of nine justices, one of whom serves as chief justice. Supreme Court justices—like all federal judges—are nominated by the president of the United States and confirmed by the U.S. Senate.
The Role of Precedent
In making their decisions, courts look at how prior cases raising similar legal issues have been decided. Previously decided cases with similar facts or legal issues are called precedents. Under the doctrine of stare decisis, courts will look to these prior decisions as guides to deciding cur- rent cases by either following them or distinguishing a current case to explain why previous decisions do not ap- ply. Courts are not completely bound by precedent but generally break with precedent only when a compelling reason exists, such as deciding that prior decisions were significantly wrongly decided.



SELECTED LEGAL ISSUES

Scope of Practice
State laws define the boundaries within which members of each health-care profession may practice. ftis is referred to as that profession’s scope of practice (SOP). fte SOP of APNs is generally found in each state’s nurse practice act. Typically, scopes of practice for nurses, including APNs, are written broadly and do not delineate specific tasks.
   State laws governing APN scope of practice vary con- siderably. Twenty-five states and the District of Colum- bia currently allow APNs to practice without any legal requirements for physician supervision or collaboration. Other states require varying degrees of involvement by physicians. State laws also vary in APN authority to pre- scribe medications—some require collaboration with a physician; some allow only some categories of APNs to prescribe; some impose restrictions in terms of types of medications that can be prescribed. New York State per- mits nurse practitioners (NPs) to prescribe only within their specialty area.
ftese varying restrictions on APN practice have been
cited as a barrier to expanding access to health-care ser- vices. fte Institute of Medicine (IOM—now known as the National Academy of Medicine, NAM) report on The Future of Nursing (IOM, 2010) included a rec- ommendation to remove SOP barriers, declaring that “advanced practice registered nurses should be able to practice to the full extent of their education and train- ing” (p. 278).

Advanced Practice Nurses in the Courts
In 1936, for the first time, SOP issues between nurses and physicians were addressed in a published opinion. ftat case, Chalmers-Francis v. Nelson (1936), involved a nurse’s administration of anesthesia over the objection of a physician and one of his associates. fte physician asserted that administration of anesthesia by a nurse was a violation of the California Medical Practice Act and should be immediately stopped. fte case was eventually heard by the California Supreme Court. In reviewing the matter, the court concluded that anesthesia administra- tion by nurses did not constitute diagnosing or prescrib- ing within the state medical practice act.
  
In Fein v. Permanente Medical Group (1981), an NP was alleged to have been negligent when she assessed a patient with chest pain as having a muscle spasm rather than a myocardial infarction. At trial, the patient was awarded almost $1 million in damages. fte case, which presented a number of issues, was eventually appealed to the California Supreme Court. One of the issues raised was whether an NP’s professional conduct should be judged according to a physician standard of care. fte court found that an NP—not physician—standard of care should apply because the NP’s scope of practice in- cludes examining and diagnosing a patient, and that the activity engaged in by the NP was within her SOP even though that activity overlapped with activities engaged in by physicians.
In Sermchief v. Gonzales (1983), the Missouri Board
of Registration for the Healing Arts threatened to charge two nurses with the unauthorized practice of medicine and to charge five physicians with aiding and abetting the unauthorized practice of medicine. ftese health professionals all practiced at a clinic in which the nurses performed family planning, obstetrics, and gynecology services using standing orders and protocols that were approved by physicians. In an attempt to resolve the is- sue, the health professionals asked for an injunction pro- hibiting the board from taking action and to declare that their actions were lawful. fte case eventually went to the Missouri Supreme Court, which ruled in favor of the nurses and physicians, affirming the ability of the nurses to practice as APNs. In reaching its decision, the court reviewed the state’s definition of professional nursing and noted that the SOP for nurses had been expanded and that the nurses in this case were practicing in accordance with applicable laws. Because these nurses’ conduct was consistent with the state nurse practice act, they were not engaging in the unauthorized practice of medicine.
Berdyck v. Shinde and HR Magruder Memorial Hospi-
tal was decided by the Ohio Supreme Court in 1993. In this case, the court ruled that the standard of care appli- cable to any health professional was the same, regardless of the particular professional performing that skill. Here, a nurse and physician were both accused of negligence with regard to recognizing the signs and symptoms of pre-eclampsia. One of the issues the justices dealt with on appeal was the duty of care owed to the patient. In rendering its decision to affirm the lower court’s denial



of the hospital’s motion for summary judgment, the jus- tices noted that the fact that a physician owes a particular duty of care to a patient does not mean that the nurse is exempt from owing that same duty of care. fte court observed that the same act may be within the practice standards for both nurses and physicians and that both groups of health professionals must embark on the com- pletion of that act in a way that is consistent with their respective duties of care to their clients.
  fte Ohio Supreme Court’s determination in the Berdyck case was reiterated in Ali v. Community Health Care Plan, Inc. (2002). fte plaintiff sued a health maintenance organization (HMO) that employed a nurse-midwife. fte plaintiff alleged that she was treated negligently during her pregnancy, thereby causing her to lose the baby. She had reported the development of a vaginal discharge to the HMO’s nurse-midwife during a telephone conversation approximately 2 weeks after hav- ing an amniocentesis. She claimed that the nurse-midwife failed to direct her to see a physician. fte nurse-midwife countered that the character of the vaginal discharge reported by the patient was not indicative of a loss of amniotic fluid. fte nurse-midwife’s documentation sup- ported her position. fte case was tried, and the judge instructed the jury to apply a certain standard of care: what a reasonable and prudent nurse-midwife practicing obstetrics and gynecology would have done under the same circumstances. fte jury rendered a verdict in favor of the HMO. fte plaintiff appealed and argued that the trial judge should have directed the jury to apply a differ- ent standard: what a reasonable and prudent professional practicing obstetrics and gynecology would have done under the same circumstances. fte plaintiff contended that the nurse-midwife standard was a lower standard. fte appellate court disagreed and determined that any professional practicing obstetrics and gynecology would be required to direct a patient to be seen if the patient reported signs and symptoms consistent with loss of am- niotic fluid. fte verdict rendered by the trial court was affirmed.
Spine Diagnostics Center of Baton Rouge Inc. v. Louisi-
ana State Board of Nursing (2008) concerned a Louisiana State Board of Nursing Advisory Opinion finding that interventional pain management falls within the SOP of certified registered nurse anesthetists (CRNAs). A trial court ruled that the Advisory Opinion constituted a

regulation expanding the CRNA scope of practice into a new area. An appellate court affirmed, finding that in- terventional pain management is “solely the practice of medicine” and agreeing that the Advisory Opinion was a regulation that the BON had issued without provid- ing notice and an opportunity to comment, as required by the state Administrative Procedures Act, and finding it invalid. fte state supreme court declined to hear the case, allowing the appellate court ruling to stand.
   In 2011, an Iowa court invalidated rules issued by the state BON and department of public health that au- thorized APNs to supervise fluoroscopy. Iowa physician groups argued that the rules were invalid because state law prohibits the expansion of nursing into medicine without official recognition by physicians. fte court found that state law also required that the agencies first establish a curriculum, safety standards, and an exam- ination before authorizing NPs to supervise fluoroscopy. fte Iowa Supreme Court reversed the trial court’s deci- sion; it upheld the law, declaring that “[T]he legislature has clearly vested the nursing board with rulemaking and interpretive authority” (Iowa Medical Society v. Iowa Board of Nursing, 2013).

Professional Discipline
BONs govern the practice of nursing in every state. It is the responsibility of the BON to protect the public from conduct that poses a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. Each state’s nursing practice act and/ or regulations set out specific grounds for professional discipline.
   Among the reasons for disciplinary action against APNs are these: exceeding SOP; drug diversion or prob- lematic alcohol use; boundary violations; and crimi- nal activity or convictions, including felonies that fall outside of NP clinical practice such as convictions for assault or theft (Hudspeth, 2009) and inadequate or in- appropriate documentation (Oyeleye, 2019).
   When an APN is accused of violating the state nurse practice act, the APN must be notified in the complaint of the specific alleged violations. A disciplinary action process will be held in accordance with the state’s ad- ministrative procedures act. fte provisions of that law ensure that individual disciplinary action proceedings occur in a manner that respects the due process rights



of the nurse. Following disciplinary proceedings, a BON will issue final agency orders, including disciplinary ac- tion, if any. Disciplinary action may include issuing a reprimand, suspending the APN’s license, or revoking it. Once a final agency order is issued by a BON, the matter is concluded unless one of the parties seeks to appeal the decision in court.
   Although an APN has the right to appeal a BON deci- sion, a court will generally not substitute its own judgment for that of the board because the board is presumed to have the expertise to decide issues of nursing practice. However, there are circumstances under which a court might reverse a board’s disciplinary action. Typically, reversals occur when a court determines that the nurse’s due process or other constitutional rights were violated; the board acted beyond its statutory authority; it failed to follow required procedures, committed an error of law, or made an arbi- trary and capricious decision (Kjervik & Brous, 2010).

FRAUD AND ABUSE

Responsibility and accountability are not new concepts for APNs or for any professional nurse. As APNs have broadened their roles in health care, areas of potential legal risk have grown.
   As Medicare providers, APNs are able to receive Medicare provider numbers (known as National Provider Identification, or NPI) and to bill Medicare directly for covered services. APNs are generally recognized as pro- viders by group and private health plans as well. Recog- nition as providers has also brought an increased need for APNs to understand the requirements for sound, legal billing practices.
   Federal and state governments have sharpened their focus on fraudulent and abusive practices by health-care providers. As independently accountable professionals, it is in APNs’ interests to understand what is expected of them as providers under Medicare, Medicaid, and other health-care programs and plans. In this, as in most other areas of law, ignorance of the law does not excuse vio- lations. fte fact that a practice may use billing staff or an outside billing specialist does not mean that provid- ers are not expected to know, and to be responsible for, claims and documentation submitted under their names and provider numbers.
  
APNs need to have some familiarity with reimburse- ment laws and what they are expected to do to avoid violations. Some common examples of conduct that may be considered to violate fraud and abuse laws include billing for services that were not actually furnished to the patient, misrepresenting the patient’s diagnosis (provid- ing a false or more severe diagnosis to justify payment or to increase the amount of payment), misrepresenting the services provided (billing for more complex or intense services than those that were actually furnished to the pa- tient), misrepresenting the medical necessity of services provided, and billing for services under circumstances in which requirements for payment have not been met.
fte federal government and many state governments
have been stepping up investigation and enforcement activities related to fraud and abuse for several years. fte ACA increased federal sentencing guidelines for health-care fraud that involves more than $1 million in losses; increased coordination between CMS, the HHS Office of Inspector General (OIG), and the Department of Justice; and added greater oversight of private insur- ance abuse (CMS, 2016).

Assessing Risk and Avoiding Fraud and Abuse
Whether in their own practices, in physician-based prac- tices, or in hospital-based practices, APNs should be aware of programs in place to ensure compliance with applicable laws on billing for services. APNs should not assume that billing practices that have been in place for some time must be okay because “we have always done it this way.” Enforcement agencies are generally concerned more with patterns of inappropriate, illegal billing practices over time than with isolated, accidental events. CMS has also implemented efforts focused on prevention.
   fte Health Care Fraud Prevention and Enforcement Action Team (HEAT), a joint initiative of DHHS and the U.S. Department of Justice, includes a Provider Compliance Training Initiative to encourage compliance and to advise providers on how to avoid fraud and abuse. Several resources have been developed as part of this initiative, including instructional videos and podcasts. ftese can be accessed at http://oig.hhs.gov/compliance/ provider-compliance-training/index.asp.



   One specific area in which APNs (and the practices in which they work) must be careful is the area of “in- cident to” billing. Since its inception, Medicare Part B has paid not only for “physician services,” but also for services and supplies furnished incident to the services of a physician (CMS, 2019). Among other things, this has allowed physician practices to bill for services provided by other staff—not just APNs, but also staff nurses, medical assistants, and other office personnel. For many years, this was the only way that services pro- vided by APNs were paid for by Medicare. Although APNs are able to bill Medicare directly (under their own name and NPI), many practices have chosen to continue billing APN services as incident to services. When an NP or a clinical nurse specialist (CNS) bills Medicare directly for services (under their own names and NPI), Medicare pays for those services at 85% of what it would pay a physician. (Certified nurse- midwives’ services are paid at 100% of the physician rate as of 2011.) Incident to services are billed under the physician’s name and number and are paid at 100% of the physician rate—in essence, they are treated as if the physician performed the service. ftus, many physician practices that employ APNs see a financial incentive in billing under incident to.
Incident to billing, however, comes with several re-
quirements (CMS, 2019). fte physician must initiate the patient’s course of treatment and must provide subse- quent services frequently enough to reflect the physician’s continuing active participation in and management of the course of treatment. fte services must be provided under direct physician supervision—the physician must be present in the office suite and immediately available to provide assistance and direction throughout the time the APN is providing services to the patient. fte APN must be an employee, leased employee, or independent contractor of the physician, or of the entity that employs or contracts with the physician. (ftese conditions do not apply to services billed under the APRN’s name and NPI.)
ftese requirements reflect the fact that incident to
payment was not designed as a mechanism for paying independent providers of care, but rather as a way to re- imburse physicians for services provided by office staff. Incident to billing long predates recognition of APNs as Medicare providers.
  
Although incident to billing allows for a higher reim- bursement level, it also requires enhanced attention to reducing the potential for incorrectly billing for services. Is there a physician on the premises and available at all times, or do APNs cover for physicians during hospital round or at other times when no physician is in the of- fice? Are there times when a new patient is seen by an APRN? Are there times when an established patient is seen by an APN for a new health problem? If the prac- tice complies with all of the conditions for incident to billing, are the details of such compliance adequately documented?
Notably, in addition to the restrictions and risks in-
herent in incident to billing for APN services, it also renders those services invisible—they are reflected in Medicare data as having been provided by the physician, not the APN.
  fte Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC), a commission that advises Congress on the Medicare program, has recommended eliminating inci- dent to billing for APNs and permitting only direct bill- ing (MedPAC, 2019, pp. 158–160). However, it has not directly addressed the issue of unequal reimbursement (85% vs. 100%) for directly billed services.

ANTITRUST LAW


Antitrust is another area of the law that can have an important bearing on health professionals’ practices. fte first federal antitrust statute, the Sherman Act, was enacted in 1890, followed by the Clayton Act and the Federal Trade Commission Act, both in 1914. Con- gress’s goals in enacting these statutes were to ensure free competition by countering business practices and transactions “which tended to restrict production, raise prices or otherwise control the market to the detriment of purchasers or consumers of goods and services” (Apex Hosiery Co. v. Leader, 1940). When competitors work together to restrain competition by others, they deprive consumers of the purported benefits of a free economic market—it removes incentives to lower prices and im- proves quality. Some activities that had been undertaken by large industries at the end of the 19th century— dividing up economic markets, agreeing on minimum prices, boycotting other competitors—were seen as



inherently injurious to consumers. As part of a popu- list reaction to the “robber barons” in industries such as steel and oil, the antitrust laws were an effort to reclaim the free enterprise system as the United States had previ- ously known it. For instance, in describing the Sherman Act, the U.S. Supreme Court noted that this statute was “designed to be a comprehensive charter of economic liberty aimed at preserving free and unfettered competi- tion as the rule of trade. It rests on the premise that the unrestrained interaction of competitive forces will yield the best allocation of our economic resources, the low- est prices, the highest quality, and the greatest material progress, while at the same time providing an environ- ment conducive to the preservation of our democratic, political, and social institutions” (Northern Pacific Rail- way Co. v. United States, 1958).
fte U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) and the Fed-
eral Trade Commission (FTC) share federal enforcement responsibilities for these antitrust statutes; in addition, state attorneys general and private parties may also bring suit under these laws. Most states also have their own antitrust laws, generally with provisions parallel to the federal laws.
  fte antitrust laws are written broadly. fte applica- tion of these laws has been shaped by decades of judi- cial interpretation. Some activities—price-fixing, group boycotts, and market allocation (dividing up markets among competitors)—are considered per se violations. ftis means that once it has been established that a com- petitor has engaged in one of these activities, the courts do not inquire as to its anticompetitive effects, such as whether and how it has harmed competition or injured consumers. Other activities are analyzed under a rule of reason approach. Under this approach, the court analyzes an alleged restraint on competition, weighing the pro- competitive effects of an agreement against its anticom- petitive effects (Gilman & Fairman, 2015). ftis means that the court carefully examines the industry involved, the history and purpose of the restraint, the relevant market, and any special circumstances that exist in that market (United States v. Topco Associates, 1972).
For many years, the antitrust laws were considered
by the courts to be inapplicable to the activities of most professionals. “Learned professions” such as law and medicine generally were considered sufficiently different from other businesses for concerns about

anticompetitive conduct to be relevant. In 1975, in Goldfarb v. Virginia State Bar, the U.S. Supreme Court found setting minimum attorneys’ fees to be a Sher- man Act violation, rejecting the defendant bar associ- ation’s argument that they were exempt because law is a learned profession. Subsequently, the U.S. Supreme Court made the application of the antitrust laws to medicine explicit in Arizona v. Maricopa County Med- ical Society (1982). In that case, local physicians had agreed on maximum fees that could be charged. ftis decision indicated that such acts were price fixing and effectively eliminated any belief that health care was outside the reach of antitrust laws.
In Wilk v. American Medical Association (1990), the
American Medical Association (AMA) was found to have engaged in a boycott of chiropractors. fte AMA’s code of ethics had declared it unethical for physicians to associate with unscientific practitioners and later deter- mined that chiropractic practice lacked a scientific basis. fte effect of these determinations was a pronouncement that any physicians who referred patients to chiroprac- tors, accepted referrals from chiropractors, or taught at a chiropractic school would be committing an ethical violation. A group of chiropractors sued the AMA, alleg- ing that it was attempting to eliminate chiropractic care through an illegal boycott. fte U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit eventually determined that this AMA policy (which had subsequently been changed) was, in fact, a per se violation of the Sherman Act.
In 2010, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) is-
sued an administrative complaint against the North Carolina Board of Dental Examiners, which had acted to stop dental hygienists from independently offering tooth-whitening services in mall kiosks and salons. fte board, charging that the hygienists were engag- ing in the unauthorized practice of dentistry, issued cease-and-desist letters to the hygienists and mall oper- ators. fte hygienists stopped offering teeth-whitening services. fte FTC charged that the board—a majority of whose members were practicing dentists elected by the state’s dentists—had engaged in anticompetitive activity in violation of the Federal Trade Commission Act; their activities, the FTC argued, were designed to drive their competitors from the market. fte board argued that, as a state agency, it was immune from antitrust laws. Challenges to the FTC’s findings reached the Supreme



Court, which ruled in favor of the FTC, finding that the board could only be immune if its activities were actively supervised by the state. In this case, the Court found that the board members had acted to stifle competition (North Carolina Board of Dental Examiners v. Federal Trade Commission, 2015).
   In one of the few antitrust cases involving APNs, a group of CNMs brought suit against hospitals, a physician-owned insurance company, and several phy- sicians. fte CNMs charged that the defendants had engaged in concerted actions to prevent them from gaining hospital privileges, required physician supervi- sion, and the ability for their collaborating physician to secure liability insurance. fteir thriving practice was eventually forced to close. Eventually, the CNMs won settlements against some of the defendants, and the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit ruled against the remainder of the defendants (Nurse Midwifery Associates
v. Hibbett, 1990).
   In Oltz v. St. Peter’s Community Hospital (1994), the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals examined a case brought by a nurse anesthetist whose contract with a hospital was cancelled after a competing group of anesthesiologists obtained an exclusive contract with the same hospital. fte hospital, located in a rural community in Montana, provided 84% of the surgical services rendered in the area. fte anesthesiologists did not want to compete with Oltz, who charged a lower rate for anesthesia and en- joyed a good relationship with local surgeons. After the hospital cancelled Oltz’s contract, he was effectively put out of business and had to relocate to find suitable em- ployment. Oltz sued the anesthesiologists and the hos- pital, claiming that their actions constituted a violation of the Sherman Act. On appeal from a trial court verdict awarding him no damages, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in his favor, finding that Oltz had pre- sented ample evidence to support his claim that the hos- pital and physicians had conspired to eliminate him as a competitor.

Promoting Competition
Not all conduct that hinders competition constitutes antitrust violations. During the Obama administration, the FTC provided analysis and advice on the potential impact on competition of proposed legislation and/

or regulations. For example, in 2010, the staffs of the FTC’s Office of Policy Planning, Bureau of Economics, and Bureau of Competition issued a letter advising that proposed Kentucky rules governing “limited service clin- ics” (such as retail clinics) would unjustifiably restrict the activities of health professionals practicing there, poten- tially hindering the ability of these clinics to compete with other types of clinics (DeSanti et al., 2010). fte FTC may also initiate an administrative complaint when it believes that a practice is anticompetitive, as it did after investigating the North Carolina Board of Dental Exam- iners’s activities described previously.
In its 2010 report, the IOM Committee on the Fu-
ture of Nursing took note of these and other opinions and actions by the FTC. As part of its recommendation to remove SOP barriers in order to allow APNs to prac- tice to the full extent of their education and training, the committee suggested that the FTC and the Anti- trust Division of the DOJ “review existing and proposed state regulations concerning advanced practice registered nurses to identify those that have anticompetitive effects without contributing to the health and safety of the public. States with unduly restrictive regulations should be urged to amend them to allow advanced practice registered nurses to provide care to patients in all cir- cumstances in which they are qualified to do so” (IOM, 2010, p. 279). In 2014, the FTC staff—acknowledging the IOM recommendations—issued a report offering its perspectives on competition and APN regulation (FTC, 2014).

SUMMARY


Laws, regulations, court decisions, and other arenas of public policy continue to affect health care and nursing. As important as it is for APNs to be aware of how the law affects them, it is also critical for them to play a role in shaping laws today and tomorrow. Organizations rep- resenting nursing and APNs have an important role to play in advocating for policies that can expand access to health care, including advanced practice nursing services. Nursing is key to achieving the goals of health reform— something that is recognized not just by nursing groups, but also by broader groups of health-care leaders, as demonstrated by the IOM report’s recommendation


that APNs should be able to practice to the full extent of their education and training. fte opportunity is ripe for APNs—through increased advocacy and collabora- tion with a broad array of partners and allies—to shape the legal and regulatory environments to maximize their role in health care and expand consumers’ access to their vitally needed services.
















  It Can Happen to You
Malpractice and the Advanced Practice Nurse
Carolyn T. Torre



Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Describe the legal risks associated with advanced practice.
• Understand the impact of health-care reform and full practice authority on patient access to care and workforce supply and demand.
• Compare malpractice risks and adverse actions for advanced practice nurses
(APNs) and physicians by state.
• Demonstrate trends in malpractice claims as reflected in actuarial data.
• Understand the practice characteristics of who gets sued and why.
• Evaluate communications and resolutions programs as an alternative to tort reform.
• Contrast malpractice risks of independent and collaborative practice.
• Weigh the merits of a malpractice insurance policy.
• Propose actions to take when a lawsuit is filed.
• Demonstrate actions to take if going to trial and the possible consequences.
• Illustrate risk reduction strategies (clinical competency, communication, docu- mentation, state or federal law, current malpractice insurance).



495



INTRODUCTION

Advanced practice nurses (APNs) are accountable for the care they provide. ftey practice autonomously, exercise independence in clinical decision making, provide com- plex care, and prescribe or administer medications, all of which put them at increased risk of being sued for malpractice. Unfortunately, it can happen to you, and professional liability insurance is an essential practice protection. fte purpose of this chapter is to provide some basic information about the legal accountability of APNs, an overview of the current health-care prac- tice climate, the process of litigation up to the point of trial or settlement, and the risks that affect being sued for malpractice and those that affect liability insurance availability and cost. Finally, the chapter describes steps that APNs can take to minimize their risk of being sued for malpractice as well as their risk of incurring licensure actions by state boards of nursing (BON) or exclusion from federal government programs.
All nurses, including APNs, should purchase their
own individual malpractice insurance (Brous, 2017; Buppert, 2018; Coffey, 2019; NAPNAP, 2015; Pohlman, 2015). Individual policies cover nurses not only for care they provide in the workplace, but also for care they may provide outside it. Additionally, these policies offer pro- tection in the face of licensure actions by state BONs, which is critical for nurses whose practice is dependent on having an active license. Unfortunately, many APNs rely solely on an employer’s insurance policy. In the event of litigation, the employer’s insurer either may decline to cover the APN or may less than vigorously defend the APN. If these nurses do not also have their own indi- vidual liability insurance, they can be at risk of financial insolvency, particularly if they decide to settle or are ulti- mately found guilty. Additionally, employer and facility policies may not cover nurses against license-protection actions involving reports to the BON or charges of fraudulent billing by governmental agencies. Malpractice insurance, optimally, is a hedge against these risks.

APNs in Context: Parameters of Practice
APNs are expected to practice within an ethical frame- work that puts the welfare of their patients first. ftey are expected to be familiar with and abide by the statutory

and regulatory laws operative in their states and admin- istered by its BON, including those regarding initial licensure, national certification, emerging continuing education requirements, and collaborative practice or supervisory agreements with physicians. APNs are ex- pected to follow institutional policies and to provide care in accordance with evidence-based clinical guidelines. Finally, they are expected to be compliant with federal laws regarding billing and reimbursement and those gov- erning the prescription of controlled substances.

APNs IN AN EVOLVING HEALTH-CARE CLIMATE


With the implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), the number of unin- sured nonelderly Americans fell from over 46.5 million in 2010 to just below 26.7 million in 2016 (Tolbert   et al., 2019). fte largest gain in insurance was through employer-based plans, although gains were also made by coverage through Medicaid, federal and state health-care marketplaces, non-marketplace individual plans, and other plans like Medicare and military policies (Car- man et al., 2015). Members of minority groups who also live in poverty—primarily Hispanic Americans but also African Americans, Native Americans, and legal immigrants—have experienced a dramatic rise in health- care coverage (Tavernise & Gebeloff, 2016). Americans who remain uninsured despite health-care reform in 2018 are typically adult U.S. citizens earning low in- comes and categorized as working poor. Most live in the South and West, particularly in states where Medicaid expansion had been rejected (Martinez et al., 2018).
More  insured Americans, ACA provisions that  re-
imburse providers for preventive care, a growing pop- ulation, and a surge in the number of people over age 65 have combined to increase the demand for primary care providers (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [USDHHS], 2013). ftis demand is especially acute in underserved rural areas and poor urban neigh- borhoods, where shortages of primary care providers have long existed and are expected to persist as fewer medical school graduates choose a primary care specialty for res- idency and practice (Buerhaus, 2018; Dall et al., 2018; United Health Group [UHG], 2018). In 2017, only one



in six medical school graduates—5,000 out of 30,000— selected a primary care residency (National Resident Matching Program, 2017). fte Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) released a report on the supply and demand of primary care practitioners in 2013, predicting a shortfall of 20,400 primary care physicians by 2020. However, when nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) were included in primary care models, the projected shortfall of providers was reduced to 6,400 (USDHHS, 2013). More recent predictions es- timate shortfalls of between 12,500 and 31,300 primary care physicians by 2025 and a need, in particular, of more surgical specialists (Dall, 2018). While the number of physicians prepared in primary care continues to fall short of the need, the number of APNs being educated in primary care continues to accelerate. For example, nearly 16,000 NPs graduate from primary care programs each year, compared to the 5,000 physicians who enter primary care residencies (UHG, 2018). Studies under- scoring the value of employing APNs with full practice authority (FPA) to bolster the nation’s workforce prolif- erate (Brom, 2018; Cadmus et al., 2020; Moore, 2017; Poghosyan et al., 2017; Ritter et al., 2018; Weinberg & Kallerman, 2014). Currently, 24 states, two territories, and the District of Columbia have passed legislation granting APNs FPA. In March 2020, Florida loosened its longtime restrictions to permit FPA for APNs in primary care (AANP, 2020c; Daily Nurse, 2020).
Buerhaus (2018) analyzed Medicare claims data to
evaluate quality and cost of primary care NPs compared to their primary care physician colleagues and deter- mined that NPs are more likely to work in rural areas; are more likely to treat vulnerable populations, including those on Medicaid; provide more cost-effective care; and offer care of comparable quality. He noted that patients living in restricted scope-of-practice states experienced more hospitalizations, readmissions, and emergency de- partment visits—all outcomes that NPs were found to decrease (pp. 14–16).
   Psychiatric providers have been in acute demand over the past decade, not least because of a growing patient population seeking medication-assisted treatment for substance use disorders (Calio, 2018; NIDA, 2020). fte state of New Jersey serves as one example. In 2018, out of a population of nearly 7 million, 89,629 people were admitted for treatment of substance abuse with a 40.5%

countywide average report of unmet needs for treatment (Borys et al., 2019; NIDA, 2020). Between 2003 and 2013, the number of psychiatrists working with the public sector and the uninsured in the United States declined by 10%. Further exacerbating this workforce reduction is an uneven distribution of psychiatric providers and a cash- only policy on the part of 40% of psychiatrists. Psychiatric APNs can help relieve the shortage of psychiatrists, but they can do this most effectively in states where they have FPA (National Council Medical Director Institute, 2017). Certified nurse-midwives (CNMs) attend births at one-third of hospitals offering maternity care in nine ru- ral states, providing essential services in those localities where obstetricians/gynecologists (OB/GYNs) are scarce and access can be difficult (Kozhimannil et al., 2016). In 2017, the American College of Obstetrics and Gy- necology reported that nearly one-half of U.S. counties lack a single OB/GYN (Marsa, 2018). Hospitals in rural America are more likely to employ CNMs where they
have full practice authority (Kozhimannil, 2016).
   Certified registered nurse anesthetists (CRNAs) are the most likely providers of anesthesia care in rural areas of the United States and in the U.S. military (AANA, 2019), and their services are more often associated with patients who lack insurance, are unemployed, or receive Medicaid. (Liao et al., 2015). Although landmark analy- sis of Medicare claims data in 2010 found CRNA care to be no less safe than that of anesthesiologists (Dulisse & Cromwell, 2010), full access to CRNA care continues to be hampered by some states’ restrictive scope-of-practice laws as well as the choice by the majority of states to retain the Medicare regulation requiring CRNAs to be supervised by anesthesiologists in hospitals, ambulatory care centers, and outpatient surgical centers (Barnett et al., 2016; Negrusa et al., 2016).
When the COVID-19 pandemic hit the United
States with full force in March 2020, the governors of 19 states suspended or temporarily waived collaborative or supervisory requirements for APNs (AANP, 2020b). ftis bid to ensure sufficient prescribing providers during the pandemic awaits further research to determine to what degree these temporary, regulatory reprieves will make a difference in access to care as well as to outcomes and safety of care.
   fte APN title in most states includes NPs, clinical nurse specialists (CNSs), CRNAs, and CNMs. ftere



are currently approximately 428,000 APNs in the United States: 12,000 CNMs, 54,000 CRNAs, 72,000 CNSs, and 290,000 NPs (AANA, 2019; AANP, 2020a;
ACNM, 2019; Liaison International, 2020). ftis com- pares to about 954,000 physicians (Young et al., 2017) and 149,000 PAs (AAPA, 2019).
   APN programs educate registered nurses at the mas- ter’s and doctoral levels in specialties designed to cover primary, specialty, and acute care needs across the entire age spectrum. APNs work in a variety of practice settings including federally qualified health-care centers, private physicians’ offices, long-term care facilities, correctional facilities, schools, college health centers, hospitals, pa- tients’ homes, schools of nursing, governmental depart- ments, and nonprofit organizations. APNs are directly reimbursed by insurers at both the federal and state levels (Medicare and Medicaid); by private insurance compa- nies such as Blue Cross/Blue Shield, United Healthcare, and Oxford; and by many health maintenance organiza- tions (HMOs) and managed care organizations (MCOs). However, outdated Medicare laws and company policies can and do impose significant restrictions on if, how, and at what level this reimbursement occurs. In states with- out FPA, an APN’s credentialing and reimbursement by private insurance companies is frequently dependent on whether his or her collaborating or supervising physician is credentialed by that same plan. If the physician leaves the state, loses a license to practice, or dies, the APN can- not provide and the APN’s patients cannot receive care (Cadmus et al., 2020; Torre & Drake, 2014). Limiting APNs’ FPA and denying them independent reimburse- ment are both associated with decreased consumer access to care and increased health-care costs (Buerhaus, 2018; Liao et al., 2015; Weinberg & Kallerman, 2014; Xue et al., 2016).
With more APNs acting as primary and specialty care
providers of a growing number of patients, APNs can anticipate an increased risk of professional liability.

THE RISKS OF ADVANCED PRACTICE NURSING

ftere are three main types of exposure that APNs should seek to avoid: (1) financial exposure in terms of judg- ments or settlements from a civil lawsuit; (2) licensure

or certification actions by the relevant state agencies or private associations; and (3) civil or criminal sanctions and exclusion from participation in federal health-care programs for fraud or abuse. Each of these is discussed in more detail next.

Civil Lawsuits
fte first type of exposure is liability for professional malpractice. Malpractice involves a deviation from the accepted standard of care resulting in injury or death (CNA/NSO, 2017, p. 7).
   A claim of malpractice requires that a patient/plaintiff prove the following (Buppert, 2018; Grant, 2018):
1. Duty of Care: the existence of a client–professional relationship
2. Substandard Care: care that falls below the appro- priate standard of care for professionals dealing in like circumstances
3. Proximate Cause: the failure to conform to treat- ment standards that caused the patient’s injury
4. Injury: measurable harm that resulted from the professional’s care
   Negligence includes failure to follow up, failure to re- fer when necessary, failure to disclose essential informa- tion, and failure to give necessary care (Buppert, 2015). When the appropriate standard of care is not followed and results in harm to the patient, financial exposure to compensate the patient or the patient’s family occurs. ftis exposure is the typical risk that most malpractice insurance policies cover.

Licensure or State Certification Exposures
Other types of direct or indirect financial exposures arise from breaking state statutes or regulations that control advanced practice. Substance abuse, fraud, unprofessional conduct, failure to fulfill requirements for continuing education, and failure to renew state li- censes by deadlines or to have a written collaborative agreement or joint protocol with a physician where one is required are other examples of charges that can re- sult in licensure sanctions or loss of APN certification by a state BON. ftese types of risks may or may not be covered by a professional liability insurance policy.



When purchasing a policy, check to make sure that it covers them.

Federal Health Program Exclusion
Another type of legal risk is noncompliance with laws and regulations of federal health-care programs that pro- vide direct reimbursement for the services of APNs. fte penalties can be both criminal and civil. fte most severe civil penalty for breaking these laws is exclusion from federal health-care programs based on the authority of the secretary of USDHHS to ban practitioners from re- ceiving payments from any federal health-care program. ftese risks are generally not covered in a typical profes- sional liability insurance policy. In addition, all providers (e.g., hospitals, HMOs, home health agencies, nursing homes, and others) and all other practitioners (e.g., physicians, group practices, and others) who themselves participate in federal health-care programs are banned from hiring the excluded APN at risk of losing their own federal reimbursement. Federal fines, reports to the state BON, and potential loss of a license to practice may be part of the penalty (Medicare Learning Network [MLN], 2019).
Although a thorough discussion of statutory and reg-
ulatory risks is beyond the scope of this chapter, APNs must know the laws that control their practice and their reimbursement, develop behaviors to ensure compli- ance with these laws, and recognize the risks associated with noncompliance with these laws and regulations (Buppert, 2018).
   Increasing use of telemedicine requires knowledge of laws in the state where the patient resides. For exam- ple, the New Jersey BON requires that a registered nurse (RN) or APN be licensed there to provide clinical care to a New Jersey resident, even remotely. One of the most important ways to keep up with current state and federal laws, regulations, and other practice- and policy-related issues is to be an active member of your state nurses’ association, a state APN group, and at least one national organization representing APNs. Doing so allows you to participate in initiating policy changes that control APN practice, to stay abreast of changes in state and federal laws affecting APN practice, and to develop and sustain supportive relationships and communication networks with other APNs.

MALPRACTICE AND THE APN


How frequently are APNs sued for malpractice? ftere is no reliable way to gather information on the num- ber of lawsuits filed on a national basis. ftere is also little to prevent a patient from bringing a malpractice lawsuit, regardless of the ultimate merits of the allega- tions against the practitioner. fte most comprehensive source of reports on verdicts and settlements resulting from malpractice claims against health-care profession- als is the National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) of the USDHHS, HRSA. fte fact is that over the past decade more APNs are being sued, and the cost of both malpractice payouts and average expenses related to de- fending claims have gradually increased (CNA/NSO, 2017; Singh, 2020). Interestingly, data on physicians show just the opposite: in the past decade, reports of physician malpractice have decreased, and payment costs are flat or have declined (Mello et al., 2014b; Schaffer et al., 2017; Singh, 2020). Although reports of malpractice suits and settlements as well as reports of adverse actions have risen for APNs since 1990, the rise is consistent with the increase in the number of these providers over time.

The National Practitioner Data Bank and Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data Bank
fte NPDB was established by Congress in 1986 (NPDB, 2020). USDHHS is responsible for implementing and maintaining this data bank. fte NPDB is intended to improve the quality of care by restricting the ability of incompetent practitioners to move from state to state without disclosure of previous malpractice payments or adverse actions.
   In 1996, Congress created a second data reposi- tory, the Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data Bank (HIPDB), to combat fraud and abuse in health insurance and health-care delivery. fte HIPDB col- lects, reports, and discloses information regarding li- censure and certification actions, program exclusions, criminal convictions, and other adjudicated actions and decisions against both individual practitioners and institutional providers. Although there is some overlap between the NPDB and the HIPDB, only the



NPDB reports malpractice judgments and settlements (NPDB, 2020).
   State licensure boards, hospitals, and other eligible entities access these data banks to assess an individual practitioner’s (including APNs’) responsibility for errors and professional misconduct when considering applica- tions for state license, employment, staff privileges, or other affiliations. fte NPDB collects information on all malpractice payments made by insurance companies on behalf of individual health-care practitioners. Payments must be reported to the NPDB no matter how small the amount, whether or not the case is settled before filing suit, and whether or not the payment was the result of a confidential settlement. Reporting of malpractice pay- ments is mandatory for all types of licensed health-care practitioners. fte NPDB also collects information about adverse licensure or professional sanctions imposed on health-care practitioners. Reporting of adverse licensure actions, clinical privilege actions, and professional soci- ety actions is mandatory for all physicians and dentists in the United States. Adverse actions against APNs and other health-care practitioners may be voluntarily re- ported to the NPDB.

TRENDS IN MALPRACTICE CLAIMS

fte NPDB began collecting and analyzing data on mal- practice claims in 1990 and issues cumulative reports of its findings. Using a data analysis tool available on the NPDB Web site, consumers can create summaries of both malpractice reports and adverse action reports be- tween 1990 and 2020 on classes of licensed health-care practitioners by year and by state (NPDB, 2020). Since 2012, NPDB has aggregated reports of all APNs rather than detailing reports about NPs, CRNAs, CNMs, and CNSs separately.

Comparing APN, Physician, and PA Reports to the NPDB: 2010–2019
Between 2010 and December 2019, APNs number- ing approximately 428,250 experienced 3,179 mal- practice suit or settlement reports to NPDB, a rate of 0.74%—less than 1%. ftis total represents 12,000 CNMs, 54,000 CRNAs, 72,000 CNSs, and 290,000

NPs.1 Over that same period, 2,898 adverse action re- ports on APNs were made to the NPDB. During that same time period, approximately 953,695 allopathic and osteopathic physicians experienced 91,111 suit or settlement reports to the NPDB, a rate of 9.55%, and 68,949 adverse action reports. Additionally, approx- imately 149,000 PAs experienced 1,897 reports of malpractice suit or settlement reports (a rate of 1.2%) and 4,098 adverse action reports to the NPDB (Singh, 2020). See Table 29.1 for additional data.
   Comparing rates of malpractice reports and adverse actions to the NPDB for NPs, PAs, and physicians from 2005 and 2014, Brock and colleagues (2017) found 11.2–19 malpractice reports per 1,000 physi- cians, 1.3–2.4 per 1,000 PAs, and 1.1–1.4 per 1,000 NPs. In a 2018 survey by the American Association of Nurse Practitioners (AANP), only 1.1% of members described having been the primary defendant in a mal- practice case (AANP, 2019a). ftis is in contrast to the 32% of CNMs who described being named in at least one lawsuit (Guidera et al., 2012) and to the 34% of physicians who have had a claim filed against them at some point in their years of practice (Guardado, 2017, 2018).
Schaffer and colleagues (2017) determined that phy-
sician reports of malpractice suits and settlements de- clined between 1992 and 2014, but they do not find tort reform or improved patient safety to be compelling reasons for this decline. Instead, they speculate that more institutions may be settling claims on their own behalf, thus shielding physicians from being reported to the NPDB, or that communication and resolution pro- grams that result in compensation for an injury before a patient files a claim may decrease reports. More recently, other researchers dispute the claim that communication

1Estimates derived from:
NPs:	American Association of Nurse Practitioners (2017) http:// www.aanp.org
CNSs:	Liaison International (2020)  https://bit.ly/3guuy8L CRNAs:	American Association of Nurse Anesthetists (2020) http://
www.aana.org
CNMs:	American College of Nurse-Midwives (2019) http://www
.acnm.org
Physicians: Federation of State Medical Boards (2017) http://www
.fsmb.org
PAs:	American Association of Physician Assistants (2019) http:// www.aapa.org


   Table 29.1	
Reports to NPDB on APNs, Physicians, and PAs: 2010–2019

APNs: NPDB Reports of Malpractice Suits & Settlements by Year: 2010–2019 (APNs include NPs, CNSs, CRNAs, and CNMs)
2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016	2017	2018	2019	Total
242	272	318	310	283	315	362	309	354	414	3,179

APNs: NPDB Report of Adverse Actions by Year: 2010–2019 (Adverse actions include Loss of Licensure & Certification, Clinical Privileges, Panel Membership or Professional Society Membership, DEA Actions, or Federal Reimbursement Program Actions) 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Total
216	195	208	252	34	324	317	360	352	360	2,898

Physicians: NPDB Reports of Malpractice Suits & Settlements by Year: 2010–2019 (Physicians include MDs and DOs)
2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016	2017	2018	2019	Total
9904	9803	9580	9573	9270	8876	8486	8662	8579	8378	91,111

Physicians: NPDB Reports of Adverse Actions by Year: 2010–2019
2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016	2017	2018	2019	Total
5949	6375	6516	7069	6845	6898	7428	7492	7124	7253	68,949

Physician Assistants: NPDB Reports of Malpractice Suits & Settlements by Year: 2010–2019
2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016	2017	2018	2019	Total
149	178	167	176	186	187	196	221	226	21	1,897

Physician Assistants: NPDB Reports of Adverse Actions by Year: 2010–2019
2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016	2017	2018	2019	Total
368	384	415	410	431	383	422	433	405	443	4,098Source: From Singh, H. (2020). Adverse actions and malpractice reports, 2010–2020, National Practitioner Data Bank, Analysis Tool. https://www.npdb.hrsa.gov
/analysistool




and resolution (apology) programs have diminished mal- practice suits or settlements or their cost (see the section “Tort Reform” later in this chapter).

WHAT ARE APNs SUED FOR?

McCool and colleagues (2015) examined closed claims against CNMs, the major categories of care associated with liability risk were fetal/newborn complications or death (highest frequency of claims), alleged provider negligence related to pregnancy care, shoulder dystocia, alleged provider negligence related to gynecological care,

 		genetics, and vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC) (low-

Malpractice
An AANA malpractice closed-claims study determined that the highest number of claims made against CRNAs was related to intra-anesthesia care during orthopedic and general surgery as well as during cosmetic, obstet- rical, and neurological procedures. More claimants were female than male, and reviewers determined that 45.4% of adverse events were preventable (Jordan, 2011). When

est frequency of claims).
  fte most recent CNA/NSO Nurse Practitioner Closed Claims report found that most closed claims (97.6%) involved individually insured NPs. fte aver- age closed indemnity was $240,471 in 2017, up 8% since 2009 (CNA/NSO, 2017, p. 8). Expenses in cases where claims were closed without an indemnity pay- ment ranged from $21,000 to $26,000 (CNA/NSO, 2017, p. 9).



fte three most common care allegation categories were:
• Diagnosis (highest frequency)
• Medication
• Treatment and care management (CNA/NSO, 2017, p. 13)
   Closed claims related to medication rose substantially since the 2012 report, related in part to increasing allega- tions regarding the improper prescribing or managing of controlled substances; injuries associated with this cate- gory include addiction and drug overdose (CNA/NSO, 2012, 2017, p. 24).
   Four specialties accounted for 80.9% of all closed claims in 2017 (CNA/NSO, 2017, p. 11):
• Adult medicine/family practice: 53.7%
• Behavioral health: 15.3% (up from 6.5% in 2012)
• Gerontology: 11.9%
• Aesthetics/cosmetics: 3.1%
  
fte frequency and severity of claims vary by specialty, as shown in Table 29.2.
   Cases involving neonates or children are associated with higher indemnity costs because they have a longer time to live with disability and therefore higher lifetime expenses. Adults experiencing permanent disability are also accorded recognition of lifetime expenses, and the average paid indemnity for permanent total disability was more than twice as high as for death-related claims (CNA/NSO, 2017, p. 35).
fte highest frequency of closed claims occurred in:
• Physician office practice: 35.7%
• NP office practice: 16.4%
• Aging services; skilled nursing facilities: 13% (CNA/ NSO, 2017, p. 13)
   fte highest paid indemnity among medication-related cases presented in the 2017 CNA report was for gentamycin-induced permanent bilateral hearing loss.


   Table 29.2	
Analysis of Frequency and Severity of Claim by NP Specialty

NP SpecialtyPercent of Closed ClaimsTotal Paid IndemnityAverage Paid IndemnityAdult medical/primary care41.2%$31,562,191$267,476Aesthetic/cosmetics3.1%$1,847,500$205,278Behavioral health15.3%$8,984,000$204,182Emergency medicine5.7%$4,444,995$277,812Family practice12.5%$9,066,525$251,848Gerontology11.9%$4,391,568$129,164Hospitalist1%$386,250$128,750Neonatal1%$1,891,232$630, 411Pediatric3.1%$2,270,000$252,222Women’s health (gynecology)3.1%$1,666,000$185,111Women’s health (obstetrics)2.1%$2,505,000$417,500Overall:100%$69,015,261$240,471Source: From CNA/NSO. (2017). Nurse practitioner claims report. A guide to identifying and addressing professional liability exposures (4th ed., p. 12). https:// www.nso.com/Learning/Artifacts/Claim-Reports/Nurse-Practitioner-Claim-Report-4th-Edition-A-Guide-to-Identifying-and-Addressing-Professional- Liability-Exposures



Several factors contributed to the severity of the outcome for the NP who took on the care of a colleague’s family member, bowed to family pressure when the family mem- ber declined to accept in-hospital treatment, and gave a verbal order to a medical assistant for in-home treatment without the NP present (CNA/NSO, 2017, p. 26). Ad- ditional cases in the 2017 report, underscore the need for:
• Familiarity with the patient’s record, including drug allergies
• Careful attention to monitoring patients for changes
in status after alterations in treatment or medications
• High sensitivity regarding the risk for suicide
• Scrupulous documentation in all cases, not least opioid-prescribing, particularly among those with a history of substance abuse
   Descriptive data regarding NP practices, available in the 2012 CNA report but not in the 2017 report, re- vealed that most NPs with claims made against them had master’s degrees in nursing and that higher levels of edu- cation were associated with higher-than-average payouts. In general, more time spent with patients was associated with lower payouts as were higher levels of clinical hours and continuing education, the use of electronic medical records, and the use of error-disclosure policies (CNA/ NSO, 2012, p. 62). Slightly over half of the survey par- ticipants who experienced claims said that a physician was on site during the incident, leading the surveyors to conclude that “. . . the presence of a supervising physi- cian had little impact on the extent of liability” (p. 70).
Licensure Actions (Adverse Actions)
Adverse action reports on APNs to the NPDB increased from 1,185 between 2010 and 2014 to 1,713 between
2015 and 2019 (Singh, 2020). Although the CNA/NSO report reflects a slight decrease in the number of licen- sure actions among its clients in 2017, compared to 2012, there was an 80.5% increase in the number of paid claims, which rose from an average of $4,441 to $5,987 (CNA/ NSO, 2017, p. 75). fte top three allegation classes in- volving licensure actions against NPs by BONs were:
• Medication
• Scope of Practice
• Treatment and Care Management (CNA/NSO, 2017, p. 78)
  
It should be noted that while the number of paid claims increased, especially in the scope of practice cat- egory, two-thirds of total complaints were dismissed by BONs with no action taken (CNA/NSO, 2017, p. 86). On average, it took 15 months for licensure actions to be resolved, and among the possible actions were:
• Dismissal of the case
• Consent agreement (conditions must be met for NP to continue to practice)
• Letter of concern
• Probation
• Public censure or reprimand
• Revocation or surrender of license
• Suspension of license (CNA/NSO, 2017, p. 74)
   Common issues that arose from licensure allegations included inadequate communication with patients and families, lack of professional boundaries, and inadequate informed consent (CNA/NSO, 2017, p. 84).
   Between 2015 and 2020, the highest number of mal- practice awards or settlements against NPs were reported by Florida, New York, and Texas, whereas the highest payments reported were in New York and Pennsylvania. fte highest number of adverse action reports emanated from Texas, Tennessee, and Oklahoma (Singh, 2020).

Why Are Some Sued and Others Not?
Although substantial evidence exists that many more medical errors are made than lawsuits filed, little is known about why malpractice claims are filed in some circumstances but not in others, regardless of the type of health-care provider (Buppert, 2018). Moreover, when malpractice suits do occur, they are often unsuccessful for the plaintiff. An analysis of claims made against phy- sicians between 2006 and 2015 revealed that 68% of claims closed in 2015 were dropped, dismissed, or with- drawn. Out of the 7% of claims that were decided by a trial verdict, 88% were won by the defendant (Guardado, 2017, 2018). ftis does not mean that medical malprac- tice did not occur, but rather that it may be difficult to prove, at least in the case of physicians. Comparable data on APNs could not be found.
Communication failure has been found to be a key
factor in 31% of malpractice cases (CRICO, 2015). As noted, in the CNA/NSO (2012) study, generally



the longer time spent in an encounter, the fewer claims were made against NPs. Physicians see large numbers of patients on a daily basis in an effort to maximize the income stream for a practice; as a consequence, less time is spent with individual patients, which carries in- creased liability risk. Logically, spending less time means communicating less with patients about their concerns and about their treatment, which is especially prob- lematic when patients have complicated histories and complaints. A meta-analysis of the Cochrane database by Laurant and colleagues (2005) involving 16 studies comparing primary care provided by nurses and APNs to that provided by physicians found that resource utili- zation and costs were equivalent for comparable care but that patients were more satisfied with the care of nurses. Buppert (2015, 2018) emphasizes that good commu- nication is essential because it leads to satisfied patients who do not sue.
Additional circumstances may account for the higher
rate at which physicians are sued compared to APNs. fte highest rates of suits against physicians by specialty in an NPDB analysis were for neurosurgery, followed by other surgical specialties including plastic surgery and orthopedics, and then obstetrics and gynecology (Schaffer et al., 2017, p. 713). APNs perform only mi- nor surgery and are not exposed to the same surgical li- ability risks. Brock and colleagues (2017) theorize that physicians may be at higher liability risk relative to NPs and PAs because of their legal supervisory role or because they see more high-risk patients.

Malpractice Lawsuits and State Laws
Malpractice lawsuits, with rare exceptions, are filed in state court under state law rather than federal law. State laws pertaining to filing a malpractice claim vary widely and may make it easier or more difficult for patients to sue for malpractice and obtain a judgment or settlement. For example, differences in statutes of limitations (the time from discovery of an injury to filing of a lawsuit), burdens of proof, caps on noneconomic damages (e.g., pain and suffering), attorneys’ fees, and use of manda- tory medical review panels or arbitration to resolve issues affect the frequency with which malpractice lawsuits in different states are brought and the amount of judg- ments or settlements awarded.

Tort Reform
Often health-care professional stakeholders seek state or federal legislation to solve the problems of too many lawsuits and too little access to affordable insurance. Commonly referred to as tort reform, these proposed laws seek to make it more difficult or less profitable to file claims against health-care professionals. fte in- tended results are (a) to create a more favorable mar- ket for malpractice insurance carriers to continue to provide coverage and (b) for health-care practitioners to continue to provide services. An extensive analysis by Mello (2006) of multiple studies examining the impact of state tort reforms on the malpractice crisis concluded that caps on noneconomic damages reduce the average size of malpractice awards by 20% to 30% and have a modest impact on malpractice insurance premium growth but that these caps have “dispropor- tionately” negative effects on the most severely injured. Viscusi (2019) agrees that caps on noneconomic dam- ages (pain and suffering) have had the greatest impact on decreasing overall malpractice payouts, but he also agrees that this may result in insufficient funds, after attorney’s fees, to cover the cost of damage to some plaintiffs.
Mello and colleagues (2014a, 2014b) and Avraham &
Schanzenback (2015) describe the use of Communica- tion and Resolution Programs (CRP) as alternatives to current medical malpractice processes. ftese programs involve recognition of unanticipated adverse events, open communication with patients about the events, and compensation where appropriate. Significant reduc- tions in liability costs and improved patient safety are reported by early adopters of these programs. For exam- ple, the University of Michigan Health System adopted a full-disclosure-of-medical-errors program with no evi- dence of increases in claims and liability costs (Kachalia et al., 2010). In response to these findings, an increasing number of states have introduced or passed laws making apologies for medical errors inadmissible in later medi- cal malpractice cases. McMichael and colleagues (2019) examined the effects of these laws and determined that, counter to their legislative intent, they are actually re- lated to an increase in the number of malpractice claims, malpractice payments, and cost to the insurer to defend the claims.



Hard Insurance Markets
Notwithstanding their historically low incidence of claims, some APNs have, in the past, found themselves affected by situations that arise in a “hard” malpractice in- surance market. Escalating insurance premiums, coverage limitations, insurance company insolvencies, or decisions by carriers to stop covering medical malpractice altogether limit access to whatever liability insurance is available. As a result of prohibitive insurance costs or complete lack of insurance, some practitioners have taken drastic actions, including early retirement, closure of high-risk practices such as obstetrics, or relocation to a state where the claims experience was more reasonable and insurance available at a lower cost. For example, because of the malpractice burden, Xiao and colleagues (2008) found that many Michigan CNMs moved from private practice to sala- ried employment (where the employer pays the medical malpractice premium). ftose who were independently covered or who were “going bare” were significantly less likely to provide obstetrical care.


PRACTICE SETTINGS AND SPECIALTY PRACTICE RISKS

As a fundamental legal principle, each person is always individually accountable for their own torts (wrongs). As demonstrated by the NPDB statistics, APNs can and do get sued in their own right. Liability in all cases turns on whether the APN exercised due care under the circumstances. ftis conclusion is determined by examining the duty owed to the patient, the professional standards that apply to a rea- sonable APN practicing under similar circumstances, and the causal effect of any act or omission of the APN to the injury suffered by the patient. Whether anyone else, such as a collaborating physician, is accountable and can be sued for the harm caused by substandard acts or omissions of the APN depends on the relationship between the parties and on the facts and circumstances of the incident.

Employed Advanced Practice Nurses
APNs such as NPs and CNSs are employed by health-care systems as well as by acute care, extended care, and home care facilities, MCOs, and private

physician practices. CNMs and CRNAs may be em- ployed either by acute care institutions or by physician groups of obstetrician-gynecologists and anesthesiolo- gists, respectively. As employees, APNs are presumed to be covered by the employer’s malpractice program; under the concept of “vicarious liability,” the employer is held financially responsible for harm caused to a patient by its employee. fte Latin term for this principle of imputed responsibility is respondeat superior. It applies only in an employment situation because the employer effectively controls the manner in which the care is rendered (i.e., the employer has legal control over the actions taken by the employee that are within the scope of the employee’s job description). When hospitals or health-care systems are sued, it is typically a result of errors or omissions committed by employees such as physicians, technicians, nurses, and APNs. From an economic perspective, em- ployers have more assets to pay a settlement or a judg- ment and therefore are better able to bear the risk.
When an APN is in a true employment relationship,
liability for negligence continues to flow through to the employer as a consequence of this traditional principle of tort law. fte insurance rates charged to the employer reflect the risks associated with the entire pool of em- ployees. However, this allocation of risk also provides the employer with the best opportunity to manage the risk through direct payment of claims. Some health-care employers are self-insured, meaning they personally “retain” risk or fund the settlement of claims to a given dollar ceiling. In effect, they are settling with their own money, thus avoiding the higher insurance premium costs. Self-insured employers are thus strongly motivated to keep claim settlements below their self-insured limit. To achieve this objective, it is common to agree to a set- tlement without disputing which named health-care em- ployee was actually liable.
fte danger to the employed APN is twofold. First, if
named individually in a lawsuit, the APN can be found jointly and severally liable or liable for contributory neg- ligence as an individual, not just an employee. If, under these circumstances, the APN relies only on the employ- er’s malpractice insurance to cover the claim, the hospital defense counsel could decide to settle the case and leave the remaining liability to the APN individually. Second, an APN without individual malpractice insurance cover- age is subject to the decisions of the hospital lawyer, who



may not be working in the APN’s best interest. More- over, if the APN is at the mercy of the hospital insurer, a settlement of a suit on behalf of any named health-care practitioner must be reported to the NPDB as required by law. Such a settlement could be negotiated without the knowledge or consent of the APN. With the APN’s professional reputation and financial well-being at stake, the APN cannot afford to abdicate responsibility to an employer. fterefore, it is advisable to carry a sufficient amount of individual malpractice insurance to maintain control and to avoid these types of conflicts (Buppert, 2015, 2018). With individual malpractice insurance coverage, the APN has separate counsel who is not con- flicted by the interests of the employer.

Independent Practice vs. Collaborative Practice: The Risks
Independent Practice
fte APN, subject to state nurse practice acts, is increas- ingly likely to be an independent practitioner who controls his or her own professional judgments and actions. With greater autonomy comes greater individual accountability for actions. In this type of practice arrangement, the APN may deliver health-care services in one or more settings, including traditional employer settings. Independent prac- tice is usually accomplished through solo practice; group practice with other APNs; or business arrangements in which the APN and the health-care system, HMO, physi- cian, or group practice structure their relationship as one of “independent contractor” or as a credentialed member of a hospital’s medical staff with defined privileges.
As an independent contractor, the general rule is that
no vicarious liability flows from the APN to the insti- tution, physician, or other third party (Stranger, 2016). However, even when the APN is not the employee of the institution or physician, a lawyer may still argue that the institution or physician is responsible. Ostensibly the APN and the hospital or practice encourages patients to believe that the nurse is employed by the institution, a situation of “apparent authority” (Stranger, 2016).
Collaborative Practice
Whether vicarious liability is assigned to the hospital, group practice, HMO, physician, or other party turns on the specific relationships and the degree of control

exercised by one professional or party over the APN. A hospital is not held liable for the professional negli- gence of nonemployed medical staff members regardless of whether they are physicians or APNs. If physicians are by law or policy required to supervise APNs, then the degree to which they are held accountable for APN practice is greater than if they are in a collaborative rela- tionship; in the latter case, “some neglect by the physi- cian must be proven” (Buppert, 2018). In a review of six cases where a collaborating physician was found to have some liability for care provided by an NP, the physician had actually been involved in the patient’s care, or the judge imputed from the existence of the collaborating agreement that the physician should have been involved (Buppert, 2016). From a liability standpoint, this makes the continued efforts of organized medicine to resist the removal of collaborating practice agreements or supervisory requirements from APN statutes puzzling (Stainton, 2019; Torre & Drake, 2014). An analysis of medical malpractice and scope-of-practice laws con- cludes that malpractice risks faced by physicians could be reduced by the elimination of supervisory requirements for NPs (McMichael, 2019; McMichael et al., 2018).
Because APNs are significantly less likely than physi-
cians to have claims payments made against them (Singh, 2020), it can be reasonably concluded that physicians should be more concerned about the litigation risk posed by their physician colleagues than their APN colleagues. Still, even anecdotal reports of an increasing number of claims made against APNs create anxiety for physicians about APN liability risk and result in some physicians refusing to sign collaborative agreements/joint protocols or demanding large payments because they fear auto- matic surcharges to or increases in their insurance rates (Torre & Drake, 2014).
   Although many APNs work in what they would describe as collaborative practices with physician col- leagues, legal parameters set by Board of Medical Ex- aminers’ Corporate Practice Rules in some states (for example, New Jersey) preclude physicians from being a corporate partner with (or an employee of) profession- als of “lesser licensure,” such as APNs, so most APNs are employees. Where APNs work in practice together and are required to have a joint protocol or collabora- tive agreement with a physician, they may contract with physicians as consultants. fte most prudent business



relationship for all parties, including the physician, exists when the APN is an independent practitioner and not an employee. In this circumstance, accountability rests with the individual provider; no practitioner controls or is liable for the activities of another. ftis risk-control strategy does not guarantee that an APN or a physician will not be sued, but it does appreciably diminish the chances of unprotected and unwarranted vicarious liabil- ity for all parties. Although it is true that the physician who employs an APN can be liable, like any employer, for the negligence of their employees under the theory of respondeat superior, if an independent business relation- ship exists between the physician and the APN, there is no legal basis on which to automatically impute liability to the physician.
Removing the statutory and regulatory requirements
for supervisory or collaborative agreements and joint protocols from all state statutes—allowing APNs their FPA—will make it clear that the responsibility for APN care resides solely with APNs, and that should reduce real or perceived physician anxiety about increasing lia- bility risk when sharing care with their APN colleagues (Buppert, 2018; Gardenier et al., 2016; Torre & Drake, 2014).

MALPRACTICE INSURANCE AS A RISK-MANAGEMENT TOOL

Liability for individual acts or judgments as a profes- sional cannot be transferred, but financial responsibility for damage awards (indemnity) and legal (defense) fees incurred in arriving at damages may be transferred. fte objective is to limit the financial effect should an APN cause or be accused of causing injury to another. Pur- chasing professional liability coverage involves thorough investigation and selection of insurance with a regular review of coverage to be sure it continues to meet prac- tice risks. A suggested process includes the steps shown in Table 29.3.

WHAT TO DO IF YOU ARE SUED

If you are served with a copy of a suit including the sum- mons and complaint filed by the plaintiff (patient):

DO:
• Contact the insurance company verbally to activate professional liability coverage immediately.
• Hire an attorney experienced in nursing malpractice.
• Familiarize yourself with the patient’s record.
• Prepare carefully for the deposition; testimony is ad- missible in a court of law.
DO NOT:
• Discuss the case with anyone except your attorney and the insurance company representative.
• Make alterations to any document.
• Settle automatically. Settlements are reported to the NPDB.


RISK-REDUCTION STRATEGIES TO AVOID MALPRACTICE


APNs face the possibility of liability exposure with every clinical experience. fte risk is higher in the following situations:
• If they are repeatedly being asked to see patients whose level of complexity exceeds their educational preparation and their experience
• If they are faced with providing care to more pa-
tients in a limited time frame than they can safely handle
• If they are caring for high-risk, complex patients or
patients with a history of substance abuse
   An APN who believes that their current practice environment is unsafe or unsound should seek alter- native employment. Put actions into place that will prevent a lawsuit or adverse action report from ever being filed. Risk reduction strategies broadly encom- pass the four Cs—competence, caring, communica- tion, and charting (Giessel & Palentino, 2006). But they also involve informed consent, attention to de- tail, follow-through, and frequent consultation and referral (Balestra, 2016, 2017; Buppert, 2018; Coffey,
2019; Dolan & Farmer, 2016; Freeman, 2019; Grant, 2018). For a more detailed list of risk-reduction strat- egies, see Box 29.1.


   Table 29.3	
The Process of Choosing Malpractice Insurance

1. Identify a carrier.Professional liability carriers differ from one specialty to another. APN professional associations and their Web sites are a reliable source of information about insurers who can be expected to understand and have experience in representing APNs. Practicing colleagues with coverage are another source of information. Choose a company with a sound financial reputation, preferably one with an A to A++ rating (A. M. Best, 2020).2. Select the type of coverage.Purchase occurrence rather than a claims-made coverage. Occurrence policies will cover you regardless of when the incident occurred and whether or not the policy is currently active; claims-made policies cover you only when the contract is currently active. Additional tail-funding can (and should) be purchased to extend the period of coverage with a claims-made policy, but this will add to the cost of the insurance.3. Select the level of coverage.Because malpractice awards and the cost of defending APNs have continued to rise, purchase as much insurance as you can afford.4. Understand the coverage limits.For example, $1,000,000 each occurrence/$5,000,000 annual aggregate means that the most paid for any one claim is $1,000,000 and the number of claims at that amount that can be paid in 1 year is five. Find out if legal costs are included in the policy. Are they included within the limits of liability, or are they in addition to the limits? If they are not included, you would be responsible for these costs.5. Determine the policy’s settlement provisions.Look only for an insurer who agrees to consult, will permit choice of counsel, and will not settle without written consent.6. Understand the costs of malpractice insurance.Rates differ considerably for APN specialties, and the cost burden of mal- practice insurance therefore also varies by specialty and by locality. Rates are highest for CNMs, followed by CRNAs, and then NPs. Those working in obstetrics and acute critical care have the highest rates.
NOTE: Comparing costs of malpractice insurance for NPs in states where they have full practice authority to costs in states where they do not re- veals no significant increases in rates. However, rates have risen generally across the United States (CM&F, 2020; NSO, 2020).7. Know your contractual obligations.In addition to the duties the insurer has to you, there are limitations of coverage that you need to be aware of. All policies have specific exclusions under which the insurance does not apply. All policies exclude criminal   acts or events that are “against public policy.” In general, the broader the coverage, the higher the premiums.
Maintaining professional liability protection is a partnership. You also have obligations to the insurer that must be honored if professional risks are to be successfully managed. Truthfulness when applying for insurance, timely premium payments, and complying with the conditions of coverage
as stated in the policy are essential. Key among all policy conditions is notification of the insurer as soon as possible if an adverse event occurs (Buppert, 2018; CNA/NSO, 2017; Coakley, 2010).


box 29.1Risk-Reduction Strategies• Practice within the parameters of your national	• Provide appropriate supportive educational ma- certification.		terials at a level and in a language the patient can
• Know and abide by state statutes and regulations re-	understand.
garding initial licensure, certification, continuing ed-	• Provide evidence-based clinical care.
ucation requirements, and any requirements related	• Prescribe medications with care, especially to to collaborative practice or supervisory agreements.		those with a history of substance abuse.
• Know and abide by institutional policies and	• Document care and refusal of care, preferably
procedures.	using the electronic medical record.
• Listen to the concerns of patients; communicate	• Consult often and refer to other providers in a clearly and seek feedback.		timely manner.
• Foster positive relationships with patients.	• Maintain clinical competence.
• Foster positive relationships with coworkers.	• Purchase and maintain a malpractice insurance
• Resist treating friends, neighbors, or family	policy.
members for chronic conditions.	• Actively participate in state and national APN
• Be alert to changes in the patient’s condition, es-	organizations for professional support, continu- pecially to those that cause most harm.	ing education, and information about policy
• Be alert to the risk for suicide.	changes impacting practice.
• Obtain informed consent in a language the pa- tient can understand.



SUMMARY

APNs are increasingly central to the health care of Amer- icans across the life span. As the number of APNs has risen, so too have reports of malpractice suits and settle- ments and reports of adverse events to the NPDB. Al- though the rates at which APNs experience these reports are relatively low, the payout costs for damages and for defending claims have risen. Some APN specialties are at greater risk of malpractice than others, and this risk is reflected in higher costs of malpractice insurance. APNs


in states with FPA are at no higher risk of reports to the NPDB than in states without FPA, nor are their mal- practice insurance rates higher. Physicians working with APNs may be named along with APNs in malpractice cases, but this is less likely in FPA states. APNs are ex- pected not only to adhere to high standards of clinical care but also to institutional policies and to state and federal laws governing their practice. APNs can employ strategies to reduce their malpractice risk, including the purchase of personal malpractice insurance.



	
















Ethics and the Advanced Practice Nurse
Carrie Scotto

In Memoriam
Gladys and James Husted were the originators of Symphonology, a practice- based bioethical decision-making model. Based on years of clinical observation, research, and study, this ethical practice model is applicable to any health-care discipline. Both Gladys and Jim were wonderfully engaging educators, scholars, and friends to many. It is an honor to edit this chapter. Jim often spoke in parables, and some remain in the text so that readers can hear his voice.




Learning Outcomes
Learning outcomes expected as a result of this chapter:
• Identify the essence of practice-based ethics in advanced nursing practice.
• Examine the application of traditional ethical theories in practice.
• Consider the relevance of a rational bioethical decision-making process.
• Apply the elements of a rational bioethical decision-making process in the current advanced practice arena.






511



INTRODUCTION

Benner’s (2001) novice-to-expert theory of nursing prac- tice development allows for the newly practicing regis- tered nurse (RN) to begin practice at the novice level. fte novice and competent stages include acquisition of knowledge and experiences. However, advanced prac- tice nursing (APN) requires the development of expert nursing practice (Walsh & Bernhard, 2011). Experience and knowledge alone do not ensure the development of expert practice. Based on The Essentials of Doctoral Ed- ucation for Advanced Practice Nursing (American Asso- ciation of Colleges of Nursing [AACN], 2006), APN education must move the nurse well beyond the novice level. fterefore, such education must provide opportu- nities to achieve the essential and specialty competencies of advanced practice.
As health science has advanced, the complexity of
care has obliged practitioners across disciplines to con- sider not only what is possible to achieve, but also what is in the best interest of the patient—what is ethically justifiable. Practice-based ethical care has become the standard in virtually all health-care arenas (Beagan & McDonald, 2005; Hofmann, 2010). Practice-based models in nursing education place students in real or simulated clinical experiences in order to apply knowl- edge and solve problems (Parker & Greach, 2018; Rob- inson & Dearmon, 2013). In this way, students learn to discern the scientifically sound course of action based on knowledge applied to a clinical situation. However, this does not ensure that nurses simultaneously acquire the ability to determine ethically justifiable actions. ftis ability, also called moral agency or moral capacity, must be cultivated in the same way that nurses cultivate the ability to do the scientifically correct thing when pro- viding care (Taylor et al., 2019). Practice-based ethical models are meant to ensure not only scientifically cor- rect care, but care that is developed and delivered in an ethical manner safely and appropriately to the individual under the specific circumstances.
Achieving moral agency calls for the inclusion of prac-
tice ethics in nursing education models. A practice-based ethical decision-making model for APNs must include mechanisms to examine particular events within an in- dividual’s circumstances in order to determine the ap- propriate ethical course of action. Practice-based ethical

models include opportunities for feedback and reflec- tion, necessary for the synthesis and broader learning that take the APN beyond the level of knowledge and practice acquired in baccalaureate education (AACN, 2006). Health-care disciplines are developing models to promote ethically based practice centered on common principles such as identification of roles, motives, and consequences; clarification and validation of goals; and reliance on scientific context centered on preserving the patient and provider relationship (Raymond & Trop, 2007). ftese models seek to promote understanding at a more complex level to include social accountability, health and gender equity, social justice, and human rights (Aronowitz et al., 2017). Additionally, practice-based educational models include consideration of advanced technological environments (Marziali et al., 2005) and the importance of allowing time for processing.
In the Husteds’ Symphonological Model, practi-
tioners begin with patient-centered, holistic assessment, including the contexts of knowledge, situation, and awareness. From there, the practitioner considers the bioethical standards that direct practice within the pa- tient’s circumstances. Contemplation of the bioethical standards facilitates the type of reflection and intellectual dialogue that makes such nursing practice “advanced.” ftis nursing model, based on bioethics, inherently pro- motes the development of ethical practice and leads to the best outcomes and well-being for patients.
  ftis chapter reviews the traditional ethical mod- els currently used to direct practice and then describes the Husteds’ Symphonological Model, which uses a patient-centered, practice approach. Often, familiar con- cepts lead to familiar thought processes and conclusions. fte following vignette serves to encourage the adoption of unencumbered listening and questioning for a fresh look at the familiar.

THE VALUE OF COMMUNICATION


One day two nurses in a jungle village passed under a coconut tree. As they passed, a coconut fell from the tree to the ground. An argument arose between them as to who had a right to possession of the coconut. Finally, they decided to do what seemed the only fair and ethical thing to do. ftey would split the coconut



in half and each nurse would take half of the coconut. ftey shook hands and each prepared to go on her1 way (Husted & Husted, 2015, p. 39).
Nurses (and everyone else) sometimes make unfortunate decisions without ever realizing it and without learning anything from it. ftis is especially likely to occur when we do not engage ourselves in a process of discursive thought.
Fortunately, before the nurses parted, a colleague passed them. She was an APN whose years of well-examined experience had developed in her the habit of seeking out reasons and relevance. When she asked them what they were going to do with the co- conut, each was surprised by the answer of the other. One wanted the shells to use as cups for holding wa- ter and was not interested in the meat of the coconut. fte other only wanted the meat and had no interest in the shells. Because of the APN’s intervention, one nurse now has twice as much coconut meat as she would have had otherwise, and the other nurse has two cups instead of one.
   Responsible, ethical decision making and action in health care is somewhat similar to the division of coco- nuts. It requires awareness and understanding of the con- text in which the decision is to be made. All health-care professionals must assume the responsibility of seeking out what should be done and why it should be done. None of the traditional ethical systems consistently rec- ommends attention to these distinctions. “APNs are fre- quently at the forefront of advocating for patients seeking primary and/or specialty care and must be knowledgeable about the nature of ethical dilemmas and skilled in mak- ing ethical decisions” (Kalb & O’Conner, 2007, p. 197). Nursing is not only concerned with patients in cri- sis; it is about patients in temporarily unpleasant con- ditions. Ethics is not only about difficult dilemmas; it is also about everyday occurrences. Extraordinary ethical issues in health care receive much publicity; however, the nondramatic, everyday ethics of health care require everyday attention. If an APN faces a choice between

following present convenience and protecting the wel- fare of the patient, they should recognize that an ethical responsibility is at play here. A practice-based ethical sys- tem, understandably, attends to practice. fte welfare of the patient is the focus of a nurse whose ethical practice is mature and advanced.

PRACTICE-BASED BIOETHICS


For bioethics, one disability defines and sets apart ev- ery patient, regardless of the nature of their affliction. ftis is the loss of agency—the power of an individual person to initiate and sustain action, the power to act on their own purposes. To return agency to the pa- tient, Symphonology interweaves professional (ther- apeutic) practice and ethical interaction (Husted & Husted, 2008a, p. 104).
  fte purpose of Symphonology is to return the pa- tient to a state of agency where they can be their own agent to the extent possible in the context. A practice- based, symphonological (symphonology from symphonia, a Greek word meaning “agreement”) approach to ethical interaction is an approach from professional responsibil- ity. Symphonology defines ethics as a system of standards to motivate, determine, and justify actions directed to the pursuit of vital and fundamental goals.2 Ethics is not convenience, it is not etiquette, and it is not that which brings on a state of self-satisfaction. Symphonology is a practice-based bioethic derived from, and appropri- ate to, the self-determination of a patient, the purposes of a health-care setting, and the role of a health-care professional.
   Practice-based bioethics aims to relate professionals and patients internally (to bring them into the same ethical context), to make human values its focus, and to make the health-care setting maximally purposeful. Practice-based bioethics is based on interactions between a professional and a patient who relate to each other through agreement and understanding. When a nurse strengthens a patient’s confidence in their recovery or




1The Husteds used the pronoun“she” for the nurse or any health-care professional and“he” for the patient. The intention was to keep focus on individual circumstances so that ethics and ethical decisions would not be considered generalizable to similar events.



2All definitions, unless otherwise stipulated, are taken from the text by Husted and Husted (2015).



supports them in dealing with a morbid prognosis, this is nursing within a practice-based ethical system.
   fte measure of success for a practice-based bioethic is a patient’s vital objective to regain or retain power to initiate and sustain actions. An ethic that is not skillfully exercised and harmoniously interwoven with practice cannot justifiably be the ethic of a health-care profes- sional. It is the “ethic” of a nurse who is merely “going through the motions.”
   fte nurses who passed the coconut tree made a valu- able discovery. fte best action to take depends on the nature of the context, the motivations of the persons in- volved, and what it is possible to do in this context. fte best professional actions depend precisely on the same realities—and on respect for individual rights. ftese produce relevant, appropriate, and justifiable ethical actions.

THE TRADITIONAL ETHICAL THEORIES

Expert advanced nursing practice must be based on bio- ethical concerns in order to create ethical practice. ftis requires careful attention to the details of what is known about a given health-care issue and what is known about an individual within the context of their situation. ftis requires deliberate thought and analysis regarding all as- pects of the situation.
   Advances in health-care knowledge and technology over the past half century have brought about innova- tive avenues of care not possible in the past. However,

development of models to guide ethical behavior have failed to keep pace.
   Traditional ethical theories do not lend themselves to the health-care professions or to ethically defensible decisions in health-care practice. None of the dominant ethical theories are relevant to nursing practice because they lack the mechanisms to engage in dialogue and analysis necessary for arriving at ethical justifiable con- clusions. Without these mechanisms
Skillful ethical comportment will deteriorate to a merely competent level if we apply norms and prin- ciples to complex practical situations where we have the potential for skillful recognition of patterns. . . . Strategies of adjudication and the search for certitude through the application of norms and principles, though comforting, do not produce skillful ethical comportment. (Benner et al., 1996, pp. 276–277)
   Yet, this is exactly what the traditional ethical theories demand. ftese theories are summarized next. For a brief overview, see Table 30.1.
   fte dominant ethical theories being taught to nurses are deontology, utilitarianism, cultural or social relativ- ism, and emotivism. ftese theories form the basis of the ethical codes and guidelines in health care. ftey require that principles and standards be applied to situations with no regard for individual concerns. For this reason, ethical decisions nearly always involve an element of emotivism.
   Deontology proposes that actions conforming to for- mal rules of conduct are mandatory regardless of their



   Table 30.1	
Traditional Ethical Systems

SystemsDefining CharacteristicView on ConsequencesDeontologyFollowing the rules.Not important.UtilitarianismDoing the greatest good for the greatest number.Consequences to the greatest number.Social or cultural relativismBeliefs of a particular society, culture, or religion are paramount.Social mores do not relate to individual consequences.EmotivismIf I feel it is right, it is right.The individual determines consequences for self; consequences to others are irrelevant.


results. Deontology requires a nurse to act outside the context of the situation. fte morality of an action is thought to be inherent in the action—an action is either good or bad. Completion of the correct task is the over- riding ethical concern; whereas consequences are viewed as irrelevant. fte individual motivations and character structures of a patient are secondary, or more often unre- lated, to the ethics of nursing practice.
   ftere is nothing in the practice of nursing that implies that a nurse should follow a list of accepted rules with regard to the patient’s welfare. ftis idea originates in the past as traditional theories took shape when the lives of people were controlled by religious and secular absolute rulers who accorded no respect or independence to ordi- nary people. “Deontology is entirely concerned with an agent’s actions. It is unconcerned with consequences. It is also indifferent to the agent’s intentions, except his in- tention to do his duty” (Husted & Husted, 2015, p. 95). Utilitarianism asserts that one should act to pro- mote the greatest happiness (pleasure) of the greatest number of people. Utilitarianism requires a nurse to pay attention to consequences but consequences to more than just one patient. It is impossible for a nurse to be concerned about the largest number possible and at the same time provide optimum care for individual patients. Only optimum care—the best care a professional is ca-
pable of—is ethical care.
   ftere is nothing in nursing as a profession to justify the idea that a nurse should abandon concern for a pa- tient in favor of pursuing the greatest good for the greatest number. fte profession of nursing is incompatible with such a demand. Utilitarianism is a theory in which the end is said to justify the means. It would, all too often, make the patient a means and the desires of the patient’s family or the nurse’s outlook on life an end. fte purposes of individual patients, and not the whims of a greater number, are the reason for being of professional nursing.
   Social or cultural relativism is the theory that what is ethical is determined by the customs, beliefs, and prac- tices of a society or a culture. ftere is nothing in the pur- poses or traditions of nursing to suggest that a patient’s welfare should be abandoned due to the demands of one’s society or culture. ftis would turn a nurse’s atten- tion onto the views of a society or culture and away from the patient. Relativism undermines professional practice and the well-being of patients.
  
A patient’s culture is important, but it can be of no greater importance than the importance given to it by a patient. “Culture provides a set of perspectives about how the group interprets its life and what happens to it, in- cluding sickness and death. However, culture is not a dis- crete trait descriptive of all individuals in it. Rather, culture should be understood as having a dynamic nature” (Kim, 2005, p. 164). An emphasis on shared patterns should not rigidly define nursing’s perceptions of people from specific cultures (Andrews et al., 2019). fte values of a culture are taken up and expressed by each individual member. Care- ful assessment is necessary to determine how an individual values and practices their particular cultural norms.
Although cultural factors are a valuable blueprint to caring for a patient, there can be no justification for failing to allow for the patient’s personal evaluation of the beliefs of her culture to serve as the standards of culturally congruent care. Otherwise, one is caring for the culture and not the patient, and the concept of “care” will have been subjected to a radical change in meaning. (Zoucha & Husted, 2000, p. 326)
   Emotivism is the doctrine that holds that feelings or emotions are forms of ethical knowledge. fte doc- trine states that every ethical judgment and decision is simply a disguised description of a person’s feelings. fte traditional ethical systems inevitably lead ethical agents to depend on emotions rather than objective awareness. ftere is nothing in the nature of nursing to sug- gest that a patient’s welfare should be determined by the emotional state of a nurse or any significant others. Emotivism turns attention away from the patient and professional responsibility toward a concern for incon-
sistent emotional moods of others.
   None of these theories produces a concern for the person in one’s care. Each is focused on applying preset conditions without concern for the context of knowl- edge or situation.

HUSTEDS’ SYMPHONOLOGICAL ETHICAL THEORY


Similar to the “division of coconuts” vignette, the Husteds’ Symphonological fteory calls for us to recon- struct some long-established concepts in ways that allow



for application in individual patient circumstances and prevents the application of one-size-fits-all conclusions. ftis rethinking begins with human rights and the bio- ethical standards.

RIGHTS

Rights (a singular term denoting a single, noncomplex agreement) is the product of an implicit agreement among rational beings, made and held by virtue of their rationality, not to obtain actions or the product or con- ditions of action from one another, except through vol- untary consent, objectively gained. It is freedom from aggression—an agreement not to aggress (Husted & Husted, 2015, p. 20). See Table 30.2.
   In any society, to the extent people recognize and are faithful to this agreement, its members respect and enjoy human rights. When this is lacking, they do not. “When ethical agents live and interact together, the benefit of the rights agreement is so great and so obvious, the det- riment of not having this agreement is so manifestly ru- inous, that the agreement literally ‘goes without saying’” (Husted & Husted, 2015, p. 22).
   Ethical practice does not allow a professional to vio- late the rights of a patient. A dedication to human values

is internal to the ethical nature of the health-care setting. ftis presupposes respect for the rights of patients.
  fte practice of nursing goes beyond respect for rights. However, a professional, practice-based ethic must begin with the recognition of a patient’s rights. ftrough this recognition, a nurse provides a bridge between a patient’s present condition and situation and the realization of the values the nursing profession promises.
  fte reality of individual rights is not complex. It is present whenever two or more people are together. Each has a right not to be aggressed against by the other. Rights surround every human interaction, how- ever insignificant. Rights are a reality so familiar and all-encompassing that, in normal circumstances, it is the last thing with which one has to be concerned.
   fte rights agreement is the ethical foundation for all explicit agreements. It is the already pre-established im- plicit agreement that explicit agreements will be made without deception and will be honored.
   fte rights agreement structures and defines human interaction and the pursuit of human values. fte rec- ognition of rights produces interaction according to the standard of reciprocity—a voluntary process of give and take, without force or deception, and without interfer- ence with the other person’s pursuit of values.



   Table 30.2	
Individual Rights

Individual RightsThe State of Nonaggression That Results From This Implicit AgreementAmong rational beingsBeings who can think, a capacity of all humans.Made and held by virtue of their rationalityMade because of their rationality and the fact that, being rational, they can see the advantage to it.Not to obtain actionsFor example, by coercion.Nor the product of actionsBy taking over a person’s life.Or conditions of actionsBy changing the circumstances of the person’s life for the worse.Except through voluntary consentOne is not coerced—the agreement establishes the terms of interaction.Objectively gainedOne is not deluded or deceived but is fully informed.Source: Adapted from the digital supplement for educators accompanying G. L. Husted & J. H. Husted. (2015). Ethical decision making in nursing (4th ed.). Springer.



ADVANCED PRACTICE AND A PRACTICE-BASED BIOETHIC

Whenever the need for an ethical decision arises in the health-care setting, it exists within a specific, limited, yet complex context. fte more complex the context, the more valuable are the ethical attitudes of a nurse who makes decisions that are based on this context—a nurse who makes practice-based decisions.
   All of a nurse’s experience that is relevant to their ethi- cal competence is, ultimately, experience with individuals. fte health-care setting is defined by the nature and pur- poses of human beings. A practice-based ethic is defined by the same realities. Each follows and enhances the other. ftere is no such thing as skillful nursing without skill- ful ethical analysis. Ethical reasoning and clinical judg- ment share a common process, and both serve to teach and inform the other. fte importance, therefore, of at- tention to clinical practice, regardless of how far removed an APN is from the clinical setting, cannot be overempha- sized (Parker & Greach, 2018; Robinson & Dearmon, 2013). A person does not graduate from nursing school or enter a nursing graduate program already skilled in bio- ethical decision making. Just as clinical expertise requires
experience and attention, so does ethical expertise.

A Rational Form of Bioethical Decision Making
fte intrinsic ethic of a profession is structured by a pro- cess of discovering facts, causes, and motives. fte tradi- tional theories demand that a nurse disregard objective, contextual awareness and the discovery and recognition of immediately given facts relevant to the patient’s indi- vidual situation. fte theories direct discovery and rec- ognition away from a patient’s values onto the nurse’s first emotional responses or onto the sentiments, opin- ions, and desires of others. For a practice-based ethic, an answer to a dilemma that a nurse and patient share is one that is independent of out-of-context beliefs and attitudes. Ideas based on one or more of these theories strengthen views such as the following:
• Ethics can establish issues—such as what should be concluded regarding euthanasia, organ transplant issues, research on persons who are unable to give

informed consent, cloning, medical use of marijuana, and so on.
• Unanalyzed and largely irrelevant individual or cul-
tural opinions are ethical facts.
• Ethical action in certain circumstances is important, but the circumstances requiring ethical action are unimportant.
• What is true or false in a single circumstance is true or
false in every similar circumstance.
• Rights are alienable. I would not let you decide for me, but I will decide for you.

MORAL COURAGE AND MORAL DISTRESS


Nurses are obligated to practice in a way that seeks ben- efit and avoids harm for the patient. Accordingly, the practice of nursing must be moral. Because of economic, political, and social influences, the APN role has ex- panded and evolved to include more direct and autono- mous practice. ftis progression has brought an increase in responsibility for APNs that demands not only ex- pert practice, but also an increased understanding and commitment to ethical practice (Benner et al., 2009; Buerhaus, 2011). To meet this demand, APNs must pos- sess strong moral courage.
  Moral courage is the ability to do what is right or moral despite elements that would influence a person to act in another way (Lachman, 2011). It is the resolute commitment to ethical principles despite threat or risk (Murray, 2011). Ethical competence is essential for moral courage and consists of the ability to analyze and respond to moral problems uninhibited by routine, emotional, or dogmatic tenets (Lachman, 2011). ftus, moral courage precludes moral elitism and allows no claims of ethical superiority. fte patient within the context is the basis for decision making and action.
   Moral courage develops because of repeated expe- riences that move the practitioner beyond competent practice to one in which there is persistent integration of ethical principles (Miller, 2005; Murray, 2011). ftreats to moral courage arise as individuals may face risks such as loss of employment, professional reputation, future advancement, or other negative outcomes. ftis can lead to moral distress. Moral distress results when the nurse knows the ethical action best suited for the patient in



context but is unable to act because of such consid- erations as inadequate staffing, institutional require- ments, health-policy constraints, or cost containment (Repenshek, 2007).
fte relationship between moral courage and moral distress is not straightforward. It is tempting to say that if nurses have sufficient moral courage they need not experience moral distress. . . . However, given that organizations are not always supportive, even the most morally courageous staff may not be empow- ered to act. (Gallagher, 2010)
“As nurses advance into leadership positions, the com- plexity of the decisions they need to make increases, as does the potential for moral distress” (Edmonson, 2010). Unfortunately, nursing education programs have focused on teaching ethical principles and have too of- ten neglected application in clinical practice settings. Although moral courage is not sufficient to avoid moral distress (Gallagher, 2010), APNs will find that using the Symphonological ethical model when dealing with indi- viduals within the context of their professional practice will support and advance moral courage. Each experi- ence will be a patient-centered ethical event. In addition, it will enable APNs to justify their decisions and actions. fte accumulation of these events will prepare the APN with a strong foundation that will promote ethically driven patient care (Sekerka & Bagozzi, 2007).

THE IMPORTANCE OF CONTEXT

Ethics is concerned with the good of the individ- ual. fte good of an individual can only be discov- ered in a context. A professional ethic assumes that

a professional’s strength of character is appropriate to promote patients’ well-being. “Ethics provides struc- ture for placing conduct into action” (Guido, 2010,
p. 3). ftis is basic to and the defining end of a profes- sional ethic.
   A professional ethic establishes and structures the APN’s professional context. It relates an APN and a pa- tient internally within this context. fte APN functions both as a professional and as a human being within a variety of contexts. fte human and professional con- texts influence directly or indirectly the way in which the nurse performs caring tasks.
  fte APN, as an ethical agent, learns how to identify the various parts of an ethical context and their interrela- tions as an advanced practice skill. Understanding the in- dividual human values apparent in an individual patient situation constitutes an advanced practice competency. fte ancient Greek philosophers described this ability as “practical wisdom.” fte great Chinese thinkers called it fte Way—acting in harmony with the nature of things.
Context is complex and comprehensive, dynamic, and interactive. Despite how tempting and how much easier it is to resort to the general, the abstract, and the theoretical, any form of bioethics that does not put moral [ethical] problems in their myriad contexts is, in many senses of the word, unreal. (Hoffmaster, 2006, p. 40)
   fte three elements of every context that guide objec- tive awareness and action are summarized in Table 30.3. First is the context of the situation. ftis context is comprised of the interwoven aspects of a situation that are fundamental to understanding the situation and to acting effectively in it. ftis is the detailed assessment as
the patient presents and progresses in care.



   Table 30.3	
The Three Elements of the Context

SituationThe interwoven aspects of the situation that are fundamental to understanding and to acting effectively in itKnowledgeThe relevant knowledge that a health-care professional brings to the situationAwarenessThe structure that emerges from the interweaving of the awareness of the relevant aspects of the situation and of present knowledge


  fte second is the context of knowledge. ftis is the agent’s understanding of the aspects of the situation that are necessary to acting effectively in it. ftis includes what is known about the specific health-care concern of the individual, such as pathophysiology, diagnostic test- ing, signs and symptoms, interventions, and so on.
  fte third is the context of awareness. ftis may be thought of as the structure that emerges through the in- terweaving of the context of the situation and the con- text of knowledge. fte context of awareness identifies and clarifies those aspects of the situation that invite ac- tion. ftis is the basis for a coherent plan of action.
   A patient’s context is the interweaving of these three elements. It provides the resources for making justifiable decisions. Knowledge about the diagnosis and treatment of a health-care concern is insufficient for ethically jus- tifiable decisions. Knowledge of the specifics of an in- dividual’s health-care concern is insufficient as well. Ethically justifiable actions require the examination and analysis of the two contexts combined in order to arrive at justifiable conclusions.
   EXAMPLE: A nurse discovers that a patient is allergic to a certain medicine and acts accordingly. fte fact that he is allergic is one part of the context of the situation. fte discovery of this fact, made by virtue of the nurse’s past experience and present thinking processes, becomes one part of the context of knowledge. fte nurse’s pur- pose is to protect him. ftis is made possible by the con- text of awareness.
   A context always forms itself around a purpose. One discovers a purpose to be achieved and sets about dis- cerning the appropriate way to achieve it. fte key to this is to be able to know the difference between the rel- evant and the irrelevant. fte relevant is any factor in the context that will enable a professional to bring about a change in the context and facilitate the achievement of a purpose. fte irrelevant is that which does neither, as in the case of futile care (care that will not bring about benefit to the patient).
   Seeking and establishing certainty in decision requires special care. Ethical certainty can provide unwarranted comfort and may suppress dialogue and in-depth discus- sion of the situation. All the certainty that one can have in any given context is the certainty that the context al- lows. One can have contextual and contingent certainty, but never final and immutable certainty.

The Levels of a Context
Every context has several levels. fte first level is the split second, immediate present—the sensory level of aware- ness. Observations are taken of all the objective factors comprising the situation at any given moment in isola- tion from one another but without the awareness of their vital influence and relationship. ftis is the level of the traditional ethical systems.
  fte second level is brought into being by a cognitive level of awareness. ftis level is provided by one’s grasp of the nature and relationship of the objective factors as they exist in the present. ftis is the level of a nurse whose overriding concern is the well-being of the patient.
  fte third level is produced by foresight. Foresight provides the awareness of relationships, events, and causal sequences as they have evolved out of the past into the present and how they are relevant to the future. ftis is, or ought to be, an APN’s bioethic.
   fte higher the level of a context and the more an APN relates internally to the context, the more appropriate their decisions and the more effective their actions will be. A nurse is “the agent of a patient doing for a patient what he would do for himself if he were able” (Husted & Husted, 2015, p. 17). fte patient is the center of the context. fte APN is acting internally to the context when the values and motivations that produce decisions and ac- tions by the APN are the patient’s values and motivations. Values and motivations that are not the patient’s, but de- manded by the traditional ethical theories, are external, irrelevant, and often inappropriate to the context. ftey produce externally related, out-of-context actions and very often tragic examples of injustice.
ftat which is relevant to a practice-based professional
ethic is not a matter of tradition or social convention. In the health-care setting, ethical decisions and actions begin with a grasp of those things that are crucially im- portant in the life of a human individual. An APN is a human individual and is capable of understanding and dealing with this.

THE FLOURISHING OF AN APN


Decision making is that which most characterizes ad- vanced practice. Underlying decision making are clinical judgments, scholarly inquiry, and leadership. fte work of



the APN is practice; the product is patient care. fte lead- ership of the APN role is rooted in science process to in- terpret the context of practice, identify influences on care, and bring about changes in practice based on evidence.
   ftat ethical decision-making skills are part of the core competencies of all APNs is a basic tenet and central to the definition of advanced nursing practice. Ideally, the ethical aspects of practice have developed along with the clinical aspects.
   A practice-based ethic aims to relate professionals and patients, bringing them into the same ethical context, to promote human values, and to make the health-care set- ting maximally purposeful and mutually comprehensible. A practice-based ethical APN education promotes the art and science of ethical decision making focused on pa- tients’ well-being. ftis strengthens the profession of nurs- ing, keeps the practice of nursing contextually intelligible, and establishes the conditions of pride in the profession.
  fte nurse takes actions that a patient cannot take for themself. Yet, although the nurse takes these actions, they are the patient’s actions. In seeking care, the pa- tient does not give up their right to self-determination— their right to think, decide, and act. fte patient is in a health-care setting to gain the power of expressing them- self in action. fte patient is there so that health-care professionals can take the actions that they would take if they were able. ftese are actions that the patient has lost the power—but not the right—to take.
   Every action of an APN is an interaction, whether the action is a cause that results in an immediate effect or a cause whose intended effect occurs farther on down a chain of causal sequences. All cooperation requires interaction.
  fte noblest action a nurse can take, without which no justifiable action is possible, is the act of accepting the patient as a human being as real as the nurse is. Without this, the context is unintelligible, and no professional interaction is possible. APNs must develop the skills of critical thinking, self-exploration, and gleaning contex- tual relevance in ethical situations.

THE NURSE–PATIENT AGREEMENT

fte planning and delivery of safe, effective, ethical care occurs in context within the nurse–patient agreement. ftis agreement, as all agreements, is based on human

rights. Nurse–patient interaction, as all interaction, re- quires intelligibility—that all participants understand what they are doing, why they are doing it, and what they intend to accomplish. All this requires a prior agreement. An agreement is a shared state of awareness on the basis of which interaction occurs (Husted & Husted, 2015).
   A nurse agrees that, for a time, they will be part of a patient’s world, acting as the patient would act for them- self if they could. Decisions are made, and actions are taken based on an ethical agreement between a profes- sional and the patient. fte nature of these decisions and actions is limited by the terms of their agreement. Non- practice-based (traditional) ethical theories demand that ethical decisions and actions are based on predetermined rules. Symphonology, a practice-based ethic, mandates that decisions and actions are based on the context of awareness and aimed at promoting patients’ goals and improved well-being.
An APN has the resources for appropriately meeting
the demands of the context. An effective health-care setting encourages the professional in discernment and discovery. Within a context-driven environment, the APN is able to gather and apply knowledge from the contexts of knowledge and the situation. ftis knowl- edge then provides a structure for a shared context of awareness where ethical decisions can be discerned for the individual.
   A professional, through the open declaration that they are a professional, takes on various obligations as part of the nurse–patient agreement. ftrough these obligations a patient can rightfully expect the nurse to act ethically and conscientiously within the context. ftese obliga- tions and these expectations are an integral part of the agreement between the nurse and the patient (Husted & Husted, 2008b). If a patient’s context is not honored, the APN’s agreement, in whatever form it takes, is not honored. If the APN–patient agreement is not honored, then the professional is not practicing a profession, but a sham.
Professional practice is  sufficient to  establish a
health-care professional–patient agreement. One hu- man recognizes another. “Seeing each as human, di- verse, equal, and worthy were all part of the view of the meaning of human dignity” (Kalb & O’Conner, 2007, p. 200). ftey recognize the human values that



are the basis of their interaction and the attitudes appropriate to guiding these interactions. Because of this, the agreement between them can be formed spontaneously and on an implicit level—the level im- plied by their relationship. Under the circumstances, the human nature of each guides their awareness, the forming of an implicit agreement to interact, and their interaction. Even with an incompetent, comatose, or very young patient, the nurse’s responsibility remains the same. ftere is a professional agreement in place. fte nurse does not have an explicit agreement with this patient but does have an implicit, professional agreement.
Even APNs who are not practicing in the arena of di-
rect patient care still have the nurse–patient agreement in place. Educators, administrators, and researchers are all ultimately responsible for patients and their well-being. fte role of the educator is for the benefit of the patient. ftere is a teacher–student–patient agreement. A nurse administrator is ultimately responsible for patients and their well-being. ftere is an administrator–staff–patient agreement. A researcher must have the well-being of re- search subjects uppermost in mind; and thus, there is a researcher–subject agreement. fte research cannot come before the welfare of persons.

THE AGREEMENT ONE HAS WITH ONESELF

Socrates, the first systematic ethicist of the Western world (470–399 BC), is known to have observed that the unexamined life is not worth living.
Every nurse, [every APN], ought to examine her life, at least to the point at which she comes to an agreement with herself that she will be a nurse. To the extent that a nurse has not made this agreement with herself—a commitment to be a nurse—she re- sembles a patient more than she resembles what she would be if she were a nurse. (Husted & Husted, 2015, p. 43)
   A nurse who directs their actions guided by the awareness of a commitment to act as the agent for the patient embraces the profession. A nurse who is inspired by the commitment and who is dedicated to it is far less

likely to experience burnout. fte nurse experiences joy in taking action and demonstrates pride and confidence in acting as they do.
   A nurse who tries to avoid taking those long-term actions that constitute professional life breaks the agree- ment with himself or herself to be a professional. fte nurse becomes indifferent. ftey undermine themself as a professional and as a person. If the nurse has replaced confidence and pride with indifference, they have aban- doned themself and their profession.
Dedication to what one professes—acting on that which one affirms and believes—is sometimes dif- ficult to do. Adversities and frustrations arise. And these attack one’s desire and one’s sense of self. (Husted & Husted, 1999, p. 17)
   Overcoming adversities through dedication produces pride in oneself as a professional. A patient could not reasonably ask for more and should not find less. Every patient needs a rational agent to do for them what they would do for themselves simply because their well-being depends on acting on the basis of reason.

THE APN AND THE ETHICAL AGREEMENT


To the extent that an APN acts without regard for the patient’s needs and values, they assume that the pa- tient’s decisions and actions have no ethical standing. To the extent that an APN acts for a patient—according to that person’s rational motivations—the APN shares the patient’s rightful authority over themself, which is absolute.
   Many agreements require detailed, explicit discus- sion. For obvious reasons, the agreement between an APN, or any nurse, and patient cannot require this. A nurse’s interventions, quite often, must begin immedi- ately. What will be discovered during the course of treat- ment is unpredictable.
   An implicit nurse–patient agreement is formed im- mediately. ftis occurs because the role of nurse and pa- tient are firmly settled in rational human expectations. Although it is not possible for any person to know fully and completely the lived reality of another, it is the na- ture of human understanding to draw on common expe- riences and images to form agreements.



BIOETHICAL STANDARDS

fte bioethical standards of autonomy, freedom, objectiv- ity, beneficence, and fidelity are familiar concepts. Applied within traditional ethical models, they are concrete con- cepts that may (or may not) be considered when deciding ethical actions. Within Symphonology, the bioethical stan- dards signify properties inherent in the nature of every hu- man person; they are defined in Table 30.4 and discussed in greater detail next. Rather than concrete concepts, they are the innate and defining properties of a human life. Viewed in this way, they prevent actions or interactions that conflict with a patient’s power to act—his or her agency.
   Symphonology stipulates that the bioethical stan- dards are individualized characteristics that every patient brings into the health-care setting and retains by right. Any human characteristic that is necessary to successful interaction, first as a human and then as a patient, is a resource that cannot, in any way, be justifiably violated. It greatly increases an APN’s efficiency to understand the functions of these characteristics to exercise and to interact with them. fte bioethical standards signify these characteristics. ftey are the resources without which any interpersonal agreement or interaction would be impos- sible, without which a patient’s recovery would be incon- ceivable, and without which a nurse could not function.
ftese are the characteristics of a nurse and patient:
• Autonomy—fte uniqueness of the individual, the singular character structure of the individual. Every person has the right to act on their own unique and individual purposes.

A person’s autonomy is structured by the way they use their mind, the decisions they have formed, their view of life, their purposes, and the powers and disabilities of their agency. A person’s autonomy includes their power of reason and their human nature. As a consequence of their rational human nature, a person’s ethical equality with all other rational agents is established.
   Primarily, however, autonomy refers to a person’s uniqueness. No two people develop identically. ftere is no alternative to a human person being unique. ftere- fore, uniqueness is a person’s innate right. It is a nurse’s guidepost to professional actions.
• Freedom—the capacity and right to take action based on one’s own evaluation of the situation. Every person may choose a course of action without interference.
   It is the responsibility of a nurse to enable a patient to exercise their freedom—to ensure that the patient has the most complete context of awareness to make decisions aimed at their goals. fte ability to plan and act effec- tively in the present with an eye to the future is a value to, and an excellence of, any human being as a human being.
• Objectivity—the right to achieve and sustain the exer- cise of objective awareness. Every person has an objec- tive understanding of the universe outside of themself. Every person has the right to manage, maintain, and sustain their objective understanding of the universe as they choose.
   Traditional ethics usually refers to this standard as confidentiality, indicating that health-care profession- als have a duty to protect (or not protect) information


   Table 30.4	
The Bioethical Standards

StandardDefinitionAutonomyUniqueness, independence, and ethical equalityFreedomRight to direct the course of one’s lifeObjectivityAbility to manage and maintain the reality of one’s situationBeneficenceRight to judge benefit and harm for one’s selfFidelityFaithfulness to the terms of an agreement


about the patient. Symphonology expands this idea to recognize the capacity of each person to remain within their chosen objective reality.
   To the extent one fails to exercise objectivity, they cannot act to enhance their life. fte complete absence of this would destroy the ability to sustain life. Objectivity is a necessary element of human excellence.
• Beneficence—the capacity to act to acquire desired benefits and necessary life requirements. Every person may act to obtain the things they need and prefer.
   A nurse’s actions assist this effort. ftis standard es- tablishes the right of a patient (or professional acting as the agent of a patient) to act for their benefit. It is estab- lished by the necessity the patient faces to act, insofar as possible, to acquire the benefits they desire and the needs their life requires. It is the self-interest process that defines life. Nurses have an obligation of beneficence to themselves as well as to their patients and others. ftis is in keeping with rational self-interest as discussed by Husted and Husted (2015). Having respect for oneself is a prerequisite to respecting the dignity of patients, col- leagues, and others.
fte ability to achieve benefits is what makes life
worth living. fte ability to avoid harms is a correlate of this.
• Fidelity—is an individual’s faithfulness to their own uniqueness. Each person manages, maintains, and sustains their own unique life.
   For a nurse, fidelity is a commitment to the obli- gations accepted as part of the professional role—that professional role being a significant part of the nurse’s autonomy. fte dedication to continue on courses of action that are appropriate to enhancing life and well- being—this is fidelity.
   A nurse recognizes these bioethical standards (vir- tues) not as obstacles to be overcome but as character resources to be nurtured. See Figure 30.1.

THE NECESSITY OF THE AGREEMENT

Every APN is at least implicitly aware of a patient’s pos- session of these virtues. fte APN approaches the patient with the understanding of the bioethical standards, not

as favors to be granted, but as human characteristics protected by human rights. Without this awareness their agreement would not be possible. Without agree- ment, professional actions become a matter of whim. If the bioethical standards are violated, the nurse–patient agreement cannot be sustained. ftis is the source of the importance of the bioethical standards to professional practice. fteir irreplaceable importance arises in the very first moment.

The Virtues of an APN
Here we are using virtue in its original Greek and Chi- nese sense: the excellence of a person in performing their role as a person. ftus, the virtue of a farmer is to farm well, of a tailor is to make excellent clothing, and of a nurse is to nurse well. fte virtue of every human being is to live well, to sustain and enhance their life. ftus, virtue is the excellence of a human being in being human.
   Aristotle states, “Now fine and just actions . . . admit of much variety and fluctuation of opinion, so that they may be thought to exist only by convention, and not by nature” (as cited in McKeon, 1941, p. 936). However, fine and just actions follow from characteristics that are fundamental aspects of human nature and the virtues of a human person.
   fte standard of autonomy includes the inescapable fact (that is too often evaded) that every member of the human species—every rational person—derives their ethical dignity from their nature as a member of the hu- man species. ftis produces the fundamental ethical real- ity: Every ethical agent is the ethical equal of every other. No ethical agent can rightfully aggress against another for the benefit of that second ethical agent. Infidelity to, and aggression against, another can never arise from the virtues.
   An APN is much more able to take direction from the patient’s autonomy—their uniqueness—because the APN is not as engrossed in their own uniqueness as they would be if they were relatively new to the profession.
   An APN is much more capable of allowing and fos- tering the freedom of the patient because the APN has mastered the skills that an advanced beginner must still acquire. fterefore, the advanced practitioner is free to act within the patient’s entire context. Every APN has taken independent actions to become an APN. Now



Figure 30.1 Husteds’ Symphonological Bioethical Decision-Making Guide. (Source: Husted, J. H., & Husted, G. L. (2015). Ethical decision making in nursing and health care: The symphonological approach (4thed.). Springer. Usedwithpermissionof Springer Publishing Company.)



they can assist the patient to take the independent ac- tions that will restore him or her to a state of agency. Here, the APN’s experience is the best teacher.
   An APN has a much greater ability to observe a con- text and to form objective, meaningful patterns of action because their body of knowledge is greater. ftey have had to exercise objective awareness to acquire the skills of an APN.
   An APN has exercised a greater-than-average benefi- cence (rational self-interest) toward themself in achieving

the benefit of becoming an APN. As a result, the APN is better able to assist the patient in pursuing their values. fte APN sees the patient as the beneficiary of their ac- tions and has automatized this in their practice. ftis is the ethical foundation of practice.
   An APN who has had the opportunity to develop personal and professional integrity understands that fi- delity to the patient is fidelity to himself or herself, to the professional practice, and to life. As a nurse, the APN does not see this fidelity as separate from themself.



   Because an APN does not have to think solely about the technical aspects of professional practice, they are free to see the agreement as reciprocal (given the differ- ences in their roles) and necessary.
   An APN’s knowledge is comprehensive and elabo- rately organized so that information storage and retrieval is easy. Clinical knowledge is linked into networks of concepts and relationships, which are then compiled into a higher order knowledge structure that links intri- cate mental networks into a scheme of relationships and interaction.
   ftrough experience, an APN has become capable of discovering much that a less experienced nurse is inca- pable of discovering. Progress in an APN’s development will move through, and be structured by, experience to the extent that they have capitalized on this experience. Retaining experience of ethical situations will increase the APN’s context of knowledge. It will enable the APN to structure and integrate it. As the context of knowl- edge becomes greater, the context of every situation can become clearer. If he or she deliberates about the mean- ings of their experiences, this produces a relationship between their context of knowledge, the context of each individual situation that leads to an increase in their pro- fessional skill, and their context of awareness. ftis is also true of the APN’s ethical skill generally.
fte big picture, and its meaningful details, will be-
come evident through an increase in knowledge and its attendant power to increase awareness of present facts and future conditions. fte increased acuity of aware- ness will form an ever-greater body of knowledge with its power to clarify and sharpen awareness of the pa- tient’s context. ftis is the source of an APN’s ethical competence.
   ftis process of an APN’s discovery and learning can never be complete. Learning that makes further learning seem impossible or unimportant has destroyed itself as a biological instrument in human life. fte nature of every new situation must be learned. It can only be learned through contextual analysis of each situation.
   Ethical efficiency requires that every situation be approached without one’s mind being enclosed in a handful of out-of-context-assumptions. Out-of-context truths work against ethical judgment.
   Even the knowledge that character and motivations are produced by the dynamic complex of relationships

among one’s virtues (the bioethical standards) is a dead end to practice if knowledge stops there. ftis knowledge of the bioethical standards is not sufficient to ethical decision making. It is not knowledge of self- sufficient rules. ftrough analysis, the bioethical stan- dards are simply sufficient to guide the awareness that they can produce practice-based resolutions to every in- dividual dilemma. The standards must always be applied in the context.
  To be faithful to the context, an APN cannot turn their back on anything in the context, most especially on the patient.
   A context-based model actualizes the concept of treating persons as individuals and therefore selecting individualized interactions based on a unique patient’s needs and circumstances. It is a nurse’s awareness of the patient’s perceptions of their situation that assists the nurse in understanding the patient’s needs and desires. Symphonological theory is not just another compilation of traditional cultural platitudes. Symphonology pres- ents a method of helping the nurse determine what is practical and justifiable regarding those aspects of prac- tice. Further, the theory of Symphonology recognizes that the context guides what is possible and desirable in the agreement (Scotto, 2018).

ABOUT CASE STUDY ANALYSIS


When ethically analyzing a case study, a difficulty arises in that, in practice, one would request more information— more pieces of data, answers to a greater number of questions—but the nurse can only work with what they have. And so, in a case study, the dilemma must occur entirely within the given context. Now consider the case presented in Box 30.1.
   Notice that in analyzing this case we did not once use the term ethics nor did we name the bioethical standards. Nonetheless, our process was one of ethi- cal decision making from a practice-based perspective. Similarly, a study by Irwin (2004) showed that when patients had an ethical decision to make, they used all the bioethical standards (albeit not the words) in arriving at their conclusions when talking about the decision. In a more complex case, analysis through each standard would be desirable to arrive at the most



box 30.1Case StudyLois Ott, a 58-year-old, is suffering from end-stagein the experience of dying. Lois should not be allrenal disease. She can no longer do anything thatalone.gives her pleasure, and she is exhausted all the time.fte course of action that Lois has chosen willShe has decided to forego dialysis and let the diseaseinjure no one and violate no one’s rights. If we jointake its course. She has given this decision carefulher family in making her the instrument of whatthought. Her family disagrees with her decision andthey desire, we will be harming her and violatinghas tried to talk her out of it. ftey are even think-her rights. However we go about the business ofing about trying to have her declared incompetentviolating Lois’s rights, we cannot make our ac-on the basis that the toxins in her blood system aretions right. We cannot make our actions appropri-making her thought process erratic. Roger, a familyate and justifiable. It is not appropriate that Loisnurse practitioner, has been seeing Lois in the dialy-spend another 6 or 9 months alone, abandoned bysis clinic for years. Lois has discussed her plans withthe health-care system and her family and suffer-Roger. Her family has tried to elicit Roger’s help ining during this time.getting her declared incompetent.If we take control of her life and actions, herWith the dialysis, Lois could probably live an-life will not belong to her. It will belong to us.other 6 to 9 months. In supporting Lois, RogerWe will act as though she is not the one living hercan argue as follows:life. We would not be content for someone else toLois has had a lifetime of experiences. Shechoose the level of suffering we should endure andhas made a lifetime of choices and decisionsthe way we should end our life. By the same token,and formed her life and herself according to herwe should not choose for her.experiences and choices. If we, as professionals,Lois has expressed her individual desires. Manyhave a right to ignore this, then her rights in thepeople would not desire this, but many would,health-care system are displaced by habit andand Lois does. If, in every difficult decision, weforce. What we have become through our expe-were determined that those who disagree with usriences and choices does not entitle us to erasemust accept our perspective, we would simply bethe person that Lois is and treat her as one objectacting as terrorists. ftese arguments can be offeredamong other objects in the health-care system.in support of Lois. No comparable arguments canftere is nothing in this situation that would, ob-be made against Lois’s position.jectively, justify our stripping Lois of the right toWe made an agreement with Lois that wedetermine her own life. On the surface, it seemswould act as her agent. Now we are entertainingthat Lois’s family is acting in her place and tryingthe justifiability of breaking that agreement. ftisto think and decide for her. However, what Loiswill make us unfaithful to Lois and unfaithful toneeds most is help in convincing her family thatour profession. ftere is no logical way we canthey are abandoning her and leaving her all alonejustify this.

appropriate decision within the context. (For exam- ples of more complex cases in which analysis is done through bioethical standards, see Husted & Husted, 2015.)
   As we have demonstrated through the traditional ethical theories, ethics means different things to different

people. By concentrating on decision making and speak- ing in human terms that everyone can understand, you can probably avoid the chaos that results when one party may argue for a societal expectation, or a scheme to achieve the greatest good for the greatest number, or an irreconcilable rule.



MUSINGS—BEYOND DECISIONS

Each patient entering the health-care system hopes to derive some benefit. ftey hope to regain competence to perform their normal functions and to live life as they choose. ftey wish to enter again into the pursuit of happiness. At the very least, they expect to come out better able to live than when they went into the health-care system. Each of the bioethical standards is appropriate to these purposes—to promote a patient’s uniqueness.
   fte standard of autonomy enables a patient to main- tain their way of understanding themself and their world.
Sara is a timorous 82-year-old lady. Roseanne, her NP, relates to her in a manner that implies that it is all right to be a timorous 82-year-old lady. When Sara leaves the health-care setting, she will have a sense of her autonomy as strong as, or stronger than, when she entered.
   fte standard of freedom supports a patient’s right to choose a course of being.
Billy is a curious 6-year-old boy. Jane, his pediatric NP, talks to him. She explains things to him. She

right not to be harmed, and this includes the right to avoid futile care.
A patient is dying of metastatic cancer. While he was conscious, he expressed not wanting to live without hope of recovery, with only the hope of avoiding suf- fering. His family believes that he is going to recover and has made him a full code, despite all evidence to the contrary. Barbara, his nurse, arranges to discuss the situation with the family. If she is unsuccessful, she will request an ethics consult.
   fte standard of fidelity—faithfulness to the nurse– patient agreement—is to establish assurance that pur- pose of action is not abandoned.
A child has wet the bed. He begs his nurse not to tell his parents. She promises that she will not. Fidelity establishes a predictable universe for the nurse and for her patient.
  fte agreement, with the bioethical standards as preconditions, is designed to enable a patient to bring their virtues into a biomedical setting, retain them while there, and have them intact when they leave.

SUMMARY

asks his opinion. She allows him to make appropriate	 	

choices. Billy leaves the hospital as independent and self-confident as he was when he entered, or more so. In relation to his sense of freedom, Billy’s hospital stay has had a positive effect.
  fte standard of objectivity is a patient’s ability to function as a reasoning being. To do this, the patient must have access to the understanding of his or her situation.
Jeff has been put on a low-salt, low-fat diet. Robert, his NP, takes the time to explain to Jeff why he ought to stay on the diet. He motivates Jeff to stay on his diet by appealing to his understanding (his reason). He makes Jeff an active participant in his plan of care. He does not depend only on a passive emo- tional motivation that, in a few weeks, will probably fade away.
   fte standard of beneficence protects a patient’s reason- able expectation that they will derive some benefit from the health-care system. It is also recognition of a person’s

Bioethical analysis and interaction guided by the stan- dards is not possible apart from the patient’s purposes and attitudes. A patient’s entire ethical purpose is to re- cover their agency, to act, to once again take charge of their life. fte best thing that can happen to a patient is to encounter a nurse whose purpose is the same.
   ftrough their progress as nurses, APNs have, if only potentially, come to a greater understanding and experi- ence of themselves, of who they are, and hopefully they have come to appreciate the importance of this. ftrough their experience, they have come to understand the dif- ference in the uniqueness in individuals and have gained a clearer insight into the meaning of this to an individu- al’s progress toward a better life.
   ftrough their experience, they have developed a greater-than-average skill at pursuing long-term goals guided by objective awareness and an understanding of the importance and joy of this. Because of this, APNs are able to support their patients down a version of the same path they have taken.




















A
Accomplishments, trends, and future, of advanced practice nurse (APN), 429–430, 434–435, 440
certified nurse-midwife, 431
certified registered nurse anesthetists, 431 clinical nurse specialist, 432–433
health-care delivery and redesign, 437, 438f innovation and partnerships, 438–439 knowledge and evidence translation, 436 nurse practitioners, 431–432
professional practice models, 438
Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs), 129, 154, 251–252, 376 Accreditation, 114. See also Consensus Model for APRN Regulation:
Licensure, Accreditation, Certification and Education (LACE)
Accreditation Commission for Education in Nursing (ACEN), 47 Acquisition, 38–39, 39b, 40b
Acute care nurse practitioners (ACNPs), 23, 27, 210b, 211b Adhocracy, 41
Advanced alternative payment model (AAPM), 162 Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS), 125 Advanced clinical nurse specialist (ACNS), 85 Advanced clinical practitioners (ACPs), 78 Advanced holistic nurse (AHN-BC), 282
Advanced Illness Management Model (AIM), 261 Advanced Nursing Education Unit (ANEU), 69 Advanced practice holistic nurse (APHN-BC), 282
Advanced practice hospice and palliative nurse (ACHPN), 32 Advanced practice nurse (APN), 1, 4
accomplishments, trends, and future, of, 429–440, 438f autonomy of, 60
coalition to transform advanced care and, 296–297 competency in
advocacy and, 239–248, 240b, 245t, 246b, 247b
basic skills for teaching, 306–323, 308b, 308t, 310b, 313t, 314t, 316b, 317t, 319b, 320b
case management, 249–265, 254b, 257t conflict resolution, 359–367
culture as variable in practice, 324–358, 327b, 329b, 330b, 330f, 331b, 334f, 335b, 336b, 338b, 340t, 343b, 345t,
351b, 354b, 355b
evidence-based practice, 221–238, 225f, 233t, 235b, 236b, 238b

holism, complementary, and integrative health approaches, 277–305, 278b, 279t, 281b, 282b, 283b, 284t, 285b,
288b, 289t, 300b, 301t, 303b, 304b
information technology, 386–392,  388t
leadership for, 368–385, 370b, 371f, 372b, 380b, 384t publication, 393–404, 400b
   research, 266–276, 268b, 271b core competencies, 202, 202f education preparation of, 44
background, 45–47
DNP or PHD, 50–55, 52t
   doctor of nursing practice, 47–50, 49f emerging roles of, 18–19, 20t
future directions for, 32–33 hospice and palliative care, 31–32
   scope of practice, 20–31, 22t, 23t, 24t ethical, legal, and business acumen
accomplishments, trends, and future, 429–440, 438f
as employee or independent contractor, 467–482, 467b law and courts, 483–494
licensure adverse actions, 503
malpractice and, 495–510, 501t, 502t, 508t, 509b nurse performance measurement in, 407–428, 412t
practice management, 441–466, 442b, 444b, 446b–447b, 459b, 460b–461b, 465b
ethics and, 511–527, 514t, 516t, 518t, 522t, 524f, 526b evolution of
clinical nurse specialist, 3, 9–12
consensus model, 16
doctor of nursing practice role, 3–4, 16 doing what has to be done, 3–17 education preparation of, 44–55, 49f, 52t
emerging roles of, 18–33, 20t, 22t, 23t, 24t evolution of, 1–2
global perspectives, 56–101, 57b, 59t, 61b, 66b, 71t, 75b, 76b, 88f
nurse anesthetists, 7–8
nurse-midwives, 5–7
nurse practitioner role, 3, 12–16 precursors and antecedents, 4–5
global perspectives, 56–57
challenges and controversy, 59–62, 61b
country illustrations, 62–101, 66b, 71t, 75b, 76b, 88f

529



Advanced practice nurse (APN) (Continued ) growing presence in, 58–59
international council of nurses role in, 58, 59t international growth, 57b
   WHO regional office for Africa, 62–67, 66b on medical staff, 127
mind and body approaches to, 289 numbers of, 20t
practice environment
credentialing and clinical privileges, 113–128, 116b, 124f health plans and quality initiatives participation, 157–171,
159b, 161b, 167b, 168b, 169b
kaleidoscope of collaborative practice, 129–156, 138t, 139f, 141f, 151t, 156b
mediated roles, 200–209, 202f, 204f, 205t, 207f, 208b, 210b, 211, 211b, 212b, 213b, 214b, 215b, 216b, 217b, 218, 218b
prescriptive authority, 105–112 public policy and, 172–179, 178f
   resource management, 180–199, 182f, 184b, 186f, 189f prescription authority of, 61–62
recognition, lack of, 60
recognition and consumer support for, 170 regulation, credentialing, and standard setting, 60–61 role development, 34
acquisition, 38–39, 39b, 40b limits on, 35b
reference groups, 36
socialization, 36–38, 38b, 39–40 stress and strain, 40–43, 41b theoretical perspective on, 35–36, 35b
state and territory environments for, 178f
   WHO-EMRO consensus on factors that influence, 71t Advanced practice registered nurse (APRN), 15
Consensus Model, 18 essential characteristics of, 23t major groups of, 20
scope of practice, 18, 20, 23t
certified nurse-midwife, 29–30
certified registered nurse anesthetist, 30–31 clinical nurse specialist, 22–24
nurse practitioner, 24–29, 24t regulation of, 21–22, 22t
Adverse childhood experiences (ACEs), 26
Advocacy, advanced practice nurse (APN) and, 239, 248 coaching and, 240–241
context for, 240, 240b
as essential component of master’s and DNP education, 246–247, 246b, 247b
levels of, 241–244 patient, 245t
to remove barriers, 244 resources for, 247b
   skill development, 244, 245t Aesthetic leadership, 375
Affective domain, 315

Affordable Care Act (ACA), 162, 176, 183, 370, 387, 408, 428,
484, 496
Africa interprofessional education network, 63
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), 146, 165, 237, 271b, 326, 412
Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), 251 Ambulatory payment classification groups (APCs), 183 American Academy of Nurse Practitioners (AANP), 15
American Academy of Nurse Practitioners Certification Programs (AANPCP), 116b
American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN), 11, 19, 22t, 45, 246, 392
American Association of Critical Care Nurses (AACN), 11 American Association of Critical Care Nurses Certification
Corporation (AACNCERTcorp), 116b
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists (AANA), 8, 47, 431 American Association of Nurse-Midwives (AANM), 6
American Association of Retired Persons (AARP), 114
American College of Nurse-Midwives (ACNM), 2t, 6, 29, 46, 134 American College of Nurse Practitioners (ACNP), 15
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), 134 American College of Physicians (ACPs), 235
American Disabilities Act, 117
American Holistic Nurses Association (AHNA), 279, 300b, 301t American Holistic Nursing Certification Corporation (AHNCC),
282, 300–301, 301t
American Hospital Association (AHA), 8
American Journal of Nursing, 9
American Medical Association (AMA), 6, 131, 194 American Medical Group Association (AMGA), 258 American Midwifery Certification Board (AMCB), 46, 116b American Nurses Association (ANA), 8, 19, 161
American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC), 24, 27, 116b, 273 American Nurses Foundation (ANF), 271b
American Samoa (AMS), 94
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA), 8, 217b Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 462 Analgesics, 111
Anglophone Africa Advanced Practice Nurse Coalition Project (AAAPNC), 62
Anticipatory socialization, 38, 40
Antidepressants, 112
Antihistamines, 112
Antihypertensives, 111
Anti-inflammatories, 111
Antimicrobials, 111
Antiparkinsonian medications, 112 Antiretroviral therapy (ART), 65 Antitrust law, 493
APN. See Advanced practice nurse
Appraisal of guidelines, research, and evaluation (AGREE) research team, 237
Appraisal process, 238, 238b
APRN. See Advanced practice registered nurse Aromatherapy, 288–289



Artificial intelligence (AI), 389
Association of Advanced Practice Educators (AANPE), 86 Asthma medications, 309
Audience group, 36
Autonomy, 60, 522, 522t, 523, 524f, 527

B
Baby-friendly initiatives, 408
Baccalaureate registered nurse (RN) case manager, 254b Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BSN), 46, 72, 253
Ballard, Martha, 4
Bankert, Marianne, 7
Basic cardiac life support (BLS), 125 Behavioral capitulation, 42
Beneficence, 522, 522t, 523, 524, 524f, 527
Biases, 230
Biculturalism, 42
Bioethics, 513–514, 517
Black, indigenous, and people of color (BIPOC), 231
Blue Ocean Strategy, 382–383 Boards of Nursing (BON), 130, 496 Body mass index (BMI), 352
Body-mind practice, 282
Breakeven, 188–189, 189f
Breckinridge, Mary, 6, 134
Brenneman, Lois, 453
British exit from European Union (BREXIT), 74 Bronchodilators, 111
Brown, Esther Lucile, 9 Buckle, Jane, 288
Bureau of Primacy Health Care (BPHC), 423 Burke, Sheila, 326
Burnout, 41

C
Campaign for APRN Consensus, 114
Canadian Nurse Practitioner Initiative (CNPI), 67 Canadian Nurses Association (CNA), 67
The Cancer Unit, 396 Capital expense, 185
Carbamazepine, 112
Cardiovascular medications, 111
Carmona, Richard, 174
Carnegie Report, 222
Case management, in advanced practice nursing (APN) background, 249–253
chronic care management and, 261–264 education for, 255–256
level differentiation, 253–254, 254b models, 260–261
reimbursement and marketing of, 264–265 responsibilities and skills, 256, 257t
tools and strategies, 257–260
Case Management Society of America (CMSA), 250, 258 Catalytic innovation, 382

Center for Evidence-Based Medicine (CEBM), 235
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 26, 165, 269, 310, 485
strategic initiatives, 370–371, 371f, 372b
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), 30, 114–115, 133, 178, 184, 252, 370
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Conditions of Participation (CoP), 115
Centre for Advancement of Interprofessional Education, 63 Certification, 114. See also Credentialing, of advanced practice
nurse (APN)
Certification Commission for Healthcare Interpreters (CCHI), 342 Certified diabetic educator (CDE), 357
Certified midwives (CMs), 7
Certified nurse-midwife (CNM), 20, 29–30, 45, 88, 213b, 214b,
431, 497
collaborative practice, 134–135 numbers of, 20t
prescriptive authority of, 106–107
Certified nurse practitioner (CNP), 200. See also Nurse practitioner (NP) Certified nursing assistants (CNAs), 153
Certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA), 8, 20, 30–31, 47, 88,
217b, 218b, 431
collaborative practice, 133 numbers of, 20t
   prescriptive authority of, 106, 108 Chaos theory, 378–379, 380b
Charge capture, 183
Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative (CAHMI), 411 Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), 331
Christman, Luther, 54
CIHA. See Complementary and integrative health approaches Civil lawsuits, 498
Clinical competence, 308t, 309
Clinical decision making, 223, 388–390
Clinical decision support (CDS), 387, 389–390
Clinical expertise, 223
Clinical judgment model, 223–228, 225f
Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA), 449 Clinical leadership, 375
Clinical nurse leader (CNL), 20, 254b Clinical nurse-midwife (CNM), 44
Clinical nurse specialist (CNS), 3, 9–12, 20, 22, 47, 63 accomplishments, trends, and future, of advanced practice
nurse, 432–433
advanced, 85
collaborative practice, 135–136 cost savings and, 23–24 evidence-based practice and, 24 mediated roles, 212b, 213b numbers of, 20t
prescriptive authority of, 106, 107–108
Clinical privileges, of advanced practice nurse (APN), 119–122 Clinical Quality Language (CQL), 166
Clinical reasoning, 223



CNM. See Certified nurse-midwife CNS. See Clinical nurse specialist
Coaching movement, in health and wellness, 283–284 nurse coach certification, 285, 285b
Code of Ethics, 332, 365–366
Codependency, 41
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), 291 Cognitive domain, 314, 314t
Cognitive intelligence, 377–378
Cognitive readiness, 309 Collaborative model, 205, 205t Collaborative practice, 129
barriers to
communication patterns, 147
educational isolation, 142 expanding scopes of practice, 144 organizational hierarchy, 143
professional dissonance, 147–148
professional elitism, 142–143
role and language confusion, 145–147 unrecognized diversity, 144
components of, 138t framework for
components, 137–139, 138t
concept, 137
iceberg effect, 141–142, 141f intensity continuum, 139–141, 139f
future of, 155–156, 156b history of, 130
Certified nurse-midwife, 134–135 Certified registered nurse anesthetist, 133 Clinical nurse specialist, 135–136
Nurse practitioner, 136–137
physician-nurse relationships, 131–132 status in advanced practice roles, 132–137
models of
accountable care organizations, 154
collaborative practice model in clinic setting, 152–153 differentiated practice model, 152
early pioneers, 152–153 in long-term care, 153
in patient-centered medical home, 154 primary nursing model, 138t, 152 shared decision making, 154–155 shared governance, 153–154
   shared professional practice, 153–154 success strategies for
collegial teamwork, 148–149 communication skills, 151–152, 151t
growth and development as joint responsibility, 149 language, 150–151
      wise use of protocols and guidelines, 149–150 Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (CCNE), 47, 174 Community health nursing (CHN), 88
Community health worker (CHW), 264

Comparative databases, 268b Comparison group, 36
Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM), 280 Complementary and integrative health approaches (CIHA), 287
educational consideration for holistic nursing, 299–300, 300b
holistic nursing and, 301–302, 303b legal questions, 303b
practice issues for, 298–305, 300b, 301t, 303b, 304b terms, 279t
Complementary health care
advanced practice holistic nursing and, 287–296, 288b, 289t approaches of, 289t
complementary and integrative health approaches, 287 guided imagery, 291
natural products, 287–289, 288b placebo effect, 290–291
research, 285–286
Complex adaptive systems (CAS), 379 Complexity science, 378–379, 380b Computed tomography (CT), 389
Computerized provider order entry (CPOE), 387, 389 Conditions of participation (COPs), 484
Conducting a Cultural Competence Self-Assessment, 337 Confidentiality, 476
Conflict of interest, 476 Conflict resolution, 359
career-long learning, resources for, 367 defense of assertions with, 360 dysfunctional responses, 361–362 effective methods for, 362–367 situation illustrations, 360–361
Congruent leadership, 375
Consciousness, 293
Consensus Model for APRN Regulation: Licensure, Accreditation, Certification and Education (LACE), 16, 18, 22, 113–115,
130, 146, 175–176, 200–201, 415
for credentialing, of advanced practice nurse, 127 implications for advanced practice nurse, 299
Consensus Standards Advisory Committee (CSAC), 165 Consultation, 211
Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS), 418, 422–425
Consumerism, 240
Context, of situation, 518, 518t Contingency leadership, 373
Continued Professional Certification program (CPC), 115 Continuing education (CE), 98
Contraceptives, 111
Cost-effectiveness, 197
Cost efficiency, 197
Council for Affordable Quality Healthcare (CAQH), 117 Council for Case Management Accountability (CCMA), 258 Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anesthesia Education
Programs, 20, 22t



Court system
advanced practice nurse in, 488–489 precedent, 487
structure, 487
COVID-19 pandemic, 408, 479
acute care nurse practitioners during, 210b anesthesia resource center for, 419 artificial intelligence use during, 389 behavioral health implications of, 253
care management during, 252, 258
certified registered nurse anesthetists during, 30 complementary health care during, 286 credentialing, of advanced practice nurse during, 128 effect on black, indigenous, and people of color, 231 family caregivers and, 241
health-care access barriers during, 370 health disparities and inequities in, 17 health-system transformation after, 176 language assistance during, 342
limited English proficiency during, 342 no-visitors policy during, 242
nursing during, 32
personal protective equipment and, 246b reimbursement, 494
remote services during, 118
scope-of-practice regulations during, 4 structural racism during, 230 supervisory requirements and, 497 telehealth during, 460b
temporary privileges during, 122, 130
Craig, Gary, 292
Credentialing, of advanced practice nurse (APN), 113 analysis of, 117–118
Consensus Model for, 127 data required for, 116b data verification, 117
across multiple organizations, 127 organizational standards for, 118 organizations, 116b
preapplication and application for, 116–117, 116b six purposes of, 114
   waived during COVID-19 pandemic, 128 Credentialing verification organizations (CVOs), 117 Critical thinking, 223
CRNA. See Certified registered nurse anesthetist Cultivated intuition, 259–260
Cultural and Linguistic Competence Health Practitioner Assessment (CLCHPA), 350
Cultural competence, 334
Culturally competent care, 335–337, 335b, 336b, 338b Culturally proficient care, 337–339
Cultural racism, 231
Cultural relativism, 514t, 515
Culture, as variable in practice, 324, 331b, 354–355 American Nurses Association and, 358

assessment, 349–353, 351b
care populations, 325–328, 327b, 329b, 330–331, 330b, 330f communication and patient teaching, 356–357
ethical mandate, 331–332
health literacy and numeracy in, 343–346, 343b, 345t health research and education trust, 337–338, 338b interpreter and translator services for, 342–343 knowledge, 353–354, 354b, 355b
legislative and regulatory mandates, 338–342, 340t linguistic competency and, 335–337
patient navigator program and, 348–349 research, as critical determinant, 357–358 role reversal, 332
scope of need, 325
theoretical basis for competence in, 332–333, 334f from theory into practice, 333–335, 335b, 336b transcreation and, 346–348
Culture of Care Theory, 332
Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), 234–236
Current Procedural Terminology (CPT), 194, 264, 446b Curriculum vitae (CV), 396

D
DAISY Foundation, 271
Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 (DRA), 162 Deontology, 514–515, 514t
Department of Advanced Nursing Education (DANE), 69 Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), 122, 163,
325, 485
Department of Justice (DOJ), 114, 171 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), 111, 164 Depreciation, 185
DeWitt, Katherine, 9
Diabetes self-management education and support (DSMES), 275 Diabetic medications, 111
Diagnosis-related group (DRG), 183, 190, 251
Dispute resolution, 477
Disruptive innovation model, 381–382 Diversity, unrecognized, 144
DNP. See Doctor of nursing practice Dock, Lavinia, 6
Doctorate of nursing practice (DNP), 433–434 Doctor of Audiology (AudD), 46
Doctor of Dentistry (DDS), 20, 46
Doctor of Education in Nursing (EdD), 46 Doctor of Medicine (MD), 20, 46
Doctor of nurse anesthesia practice (DNAP), 8, 47
Doctor of nursing practice (DNP), 3–4, 16, 44–45, 127, 246, 253, 429
dissertation versus, 50–51
faculty and, 52–53
PhD synergy potential with, 51–52, 52t programs, 19
rationale for, 48–50, 49f residency experiences, 52t



Doctor of Nursing Science (DNS), 46 Doctor of Pharmacy (PharmD), 20, 46
Doctor of Philosophy (PhD), 45, 434 Doctor of Physical Therapy (DPT), 20, 46 Doctor of Psychology (PsyD), 20, 46
Dole, Robert, 326
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), 111, 447 Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), 116b
Duty of care, 498
Dying in America, 31

E
East, Central, Southern Africa College of Nursing (ECSACON), 62 Eastern Mediterranean region. See World Health Organization
(WHO)
EBP. See Evidence-based practice Education, 60, 61b, 114, 151t, 311
Educational isolation, 142
Ehrenreich, Barbara, 4–5
Electrocardiogram (ECG), 188
Electronic clinical quality measure (eCQM), 166
Electronic health record (EHR), 162–163, 166, 258, 270, 311, 370,
387–388, 388t
Electronic information storage and retrieval systems, 238 Eligible professionals (EPs), 162
Emergency departments (EDs), 176 Emotional freedom technique (EFT), 292–293 Emotional intelligence, 377–378
Emotivism, 514t, 515
Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), 159 Employer identification number (EIN), 449
Energy therapies, 282
English, Deidre, 4–5
Essentials of Doctoral Education for Advanced Practice Nursing, 45, 512 Ethical competence, 517
Ethical comportment, 229–230
Ethical reasoning, 517
Ethics, 511
advanced practice nurse and, 519–520 agreement and, 521, 523–525, 524f case study, 525–526, 526b communication and, 512–513 decision making and, 517
Husteds’ symphonological theory, 515–516 importance of context with, 518, 518t, 519 moral courage and, 517–518
moral distress and, 517–518 musings and, 527
nurse-patient agreement and, 520–521 practice-based bioethics and, 513–514 rights and, 516, 516t
self-agreement and, 521 standards of, 522–523, 522t
   traditional theories, 514–515, 514t Ethnic minorities, 231

Ethnocentric boundaries, 325
European Federation of Nurses (EFN), 74 European Qualification Framework (EQF), 78 European Union (EU), 74
Evidence-based design (EBD), 298 Evidence-based medicine, 222–223
Evidence-based practice (EBP), 221, 233, 388–390 clinical judgment and, 223–224
clinical and research literature for, 236
clinical significance and appraisal process, 238, 238b competencies that support, 232, 233t, 234–236, 235b, 236b research evidence to improve, 232, 233b, 234–238, 235b,
236b, 238b
result analysis, 236–238
clinical judgment model, 224–229, 225f clinical reasoning factors and
context of practice, 231–232 knowing the patient, 230–231 nurses’ background, 229–230
evolution of, 222–224
knowledge translation and, 222–224 toolkit, 236
Expectations, 225–226
Explanation of benefits (EOB), 459b Express contracts, 473

F
Family nurse practitioner (FNP), 63 Federalism, 484
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 114, 171
Fidelity, 522, 522t, 523, 524f, 527 Fixed costs, 186, 186f
Flanagin, Annette, 397
Focused professional practice evaluation (FPPE), 115, 119 Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 485
Force majeure clause, 479 Ford, Loretta, 13, 45, 173 Fraud, abuse and, 490–491
Freedom, 522, 522t, 523, 524f, 527
Freeman, Harold, 155
Frontier Nursing Service (FNS), 3, 6 Full-time equivalent (FTE), 198 Future Shock, 130

G
Gany, Francesca, 347
Gardner, John, 404
Gebbie, Kristine, 174
Genetics, 390–391
Genomics, 390–391
Germain, Carol, 396 Grant funding, 271, 271b Grob, Gerald, 397
Gross Patient Service Revenue, 182 Gross revenue, 182



Guided imagery, 291
Guidelines on Advanced Practice Nursing, 58, 60
Guide to Code of Ethics for Nurses, 240

H
Healers, women as, 3
Healing touch (HT), 280, 282, 291–292 Health care
access, 370b improvement, 156b
Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS), 458 Health Care Fraud Prevention and Enforcement Action Team
(HEAT), 490
Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data Bank (HIPDB), 499–500 Health-care quality initiatives national efforts, 165, 167–169,
167b, 168b
   advanced practice nurse participation in, 166, 169b, 170 Health information exchange (HIE), 386–389
Health information technologies (HIT), 386
Health Information Technology for Economic Clinical Health Act (HITECH), 387, 476
Health insurance, for all, 331
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), 126, 246b, 342, 388, 486
Health literacy, 343–346, 343b, 345t
Health maintenance organizations (HMOs), 159, 159b, 251, 420, 498
Health plan (HP), 157
advanced practice nurse participation in, 163–165 contracting with, 160–161, 161b
health maintenance organizations, 159, 159b
necessary competencies in managed care environment, 159–160 point-of-service, 159, 159b
preferred provider organizations, 159, 159b reimbursement and, 161–163
types of, 158–159, 159b
Healthplan Employer Data and Information Set (HEDIS), 418, 422–424, 425, 464
Health plans and quality initiatives participation, 157–171, 159b, 161b, 167b, 168b, 169b
Health Quality Measures Format (HQMF), 166
Health resources and services administration (HRSA), 165, 460b
Healthy People 2020, 177, 325, 330f
Healthy People 2030, 325, 418
Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) system, 188 Heckler, Margaret, 333
Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), 275 Henderson, Virginia, 10
Henry Street Settlement, 5
Herbs and supplement usage, 288b
High Reliability Organizations (HROs), 381 Holism, holistic nursing and, 280–282, 281b
educational consideration for, 299–300, 300b emotional freedom technique, 292–293 energy approaches and, 291–294

ethical considerations with, 304–305 national opioid crisis and, 294 quantum physics, 293–294
research, 303
role development in, 303–304, 304b spirituality and, 294–296
   therapeutic touch, healing touch, and reiki, 291–292 Holistic Nurse Baccalaureate (HNB-BC), 282
Holistic Nurse Board Certified (HN-BC), 282
Holistic Nursing, 284
Home Alone, 243
Hospital-acquired condition (HAC), 184, 184b Hospital Quality Alliance (HQA), 165
Hospital readmissions reduction program (HRRP), 163 Howe, Rufus, 258
HP. See Health plan Human energy field, 291
Husteds’ symphonological theory, 512, 515–516, 524f Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT), 302

I
Iceberg effect, 141–142, 141f
Immigrant Health and Cancer Disparities Service (IHCD), 347 Immigration, 326
Immunization, childhood, 26 Implicit association test (IAT), 230 Implied contracts, 473
Income and expense (I&E) statements, 181, 182f Incremental cost, 187
Independent contractor, advanced practice nurse (APN) as contract issues with
legal pitfalls, 481–482
types of, 473–474
   written agreements, 474–481 employee or
financial and tax implications, 468–469 professional liability considerations for, 468 status determination, 469–471, 470b
   legal and contractual considerations for, 467–482, 467b Independent practice, 506. See also Malpractice
Indian Nursing Council (INC), 87 Indirect costs, 186
Information technology (IT), 386, 446b clinical and education applications
genetics and genomics, 390–391 high-fidelity simulation, 391 public health and, 392
virtual reality, 391–392
databases for clinical decision making/evidence-based practice artificial intelligence, 389
clinical decision support, 389–390 computerized provider order entry, 389 health information exchanges, 388–389 operational applications of, 390
electronic health record, 387–388, 388t



Inhalers, 309
Innovation partnerships, 438–439 Innovative care models, 3
Institute for Diversity and Health Equality (IFDHE), 338, 338t
Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI), 386, 418 Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP), 415 Institute of Health Sciences (IHS), 63
Institute of Medicine (IOM), 15, 19, 112, 130 Institute of Nursing Science (INS), 85 Integrative health care, 279–280, 279t
advanced practice holistic nursing and, 287–296, 288b, 289t
complementary and integrative health approaches, 287 development milestones in, 282–283, 282b, 283b, 284t guided imagery, 291
natural products, 287–289, 288b placebo effect, 290–291
practice issues for advanced practice nurse and, 298–305, 300b, 301t, 303b, 304b
research, 285–286
Integrative Model of Advanced Practice Nursing and the PEPPA framework, 80
Integrative research review, 237 Intensity continuum, 139–141, 139f Intensive care unit (ICU), 27, 148, 360
Interdisciplinary collaboration, 139–141, 139f, 208t
Internal Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE), 401 Internal evidence, 223
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 449, 468–469 International Academy of Nursing Editors (INANE), 397 International Classification of Diseases, 10th modification
(ICD-10), 194
International Council of Nurses (ICN), 56, 58, 59t, 61b, 430 Interprofessional collaboration, 207f
Interprofessional education (IPE), 392 Intuition, 259
Iowa Interventions and Outcomes Project Nursing Interventions Classification System (NIC/NOC), 258
Irish Association of Advanced Nurse and Midwife Practitioners (IAANMP), 82
IT. See Information technology

J
Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO), 119
Journal of Nurse-Midwifery, 7 Journey of Care framework, 438f Jung, Carl, 294

K
Kahneman, Daniel, 224 Keeping Patients Safe, 131 Knowledge, expert, 308t, 309 Knowledge translation, 223
Krieger, Dolores, 291

L
LACE. See Consensus Model for APRN Regulation: Licensure, Accreditation, Certification and Education
Language Access Network (LAN), 343
Law and courts, advanced practice nurse (APN) and, 483, 494.
   See also Malpractice antitrust law, 491–493 broad context for
court system, 487
law sources, 484
legislation, 484–487
fraud and abuse risk assessment, 490–491 selected legal issues
in the courtroom, 488–489 professional discipline, 489–490 scope of practice, 488
Leadership, for advanced practice nurse (APN), 368–377, 370b, 371f, 372b, 385
competencies, 377
emotional, social, and cognitive, 377–378 entrepreneur versus intrapreneur, 383–384, 384t environment
Blue Ocean Strategy, 382–383 change in complex world, 380
complexity science and chaos theory, 378–379, 380b disruptive and catalytic innovation, 381–382 innovation, 381
   learning organizations, 380–381 frameworks and theories in, 371–372
aesthetic, 375
clinical and congruent, 375 relational, 375
servant, 373–374
situation or contingency, 373 transformational and transactional, 374
mentoring, 384–385
networking, 384
power, authority, and influence, 378 reframed through mental models, 375 theory application, 376–377
Learning, advanced practice nurse (APN), 309. See also
   Teaching, advanced practice nurse (APN) and domains, 314–315, 314t
   educational plan for, 313t Legislation, 484–487
Leininger, Madeleine, 332–333, 334f
Licensed independent practitioners (LIPs), 115 Licensed practical nurses (LPNs), 83, 140, 471
Licensure, 114–115. See also Credentialing, of advanced practice nurse (APN); Practice management
Lidocaine, 31
Limited English proficiency (LEP), 342 Limited liability corporation (LLC), 452–453 Lithium, 112
Living Independently for Elders (LIFE), 252 Long-term care (LTC), 153, 240, 251



M
Magaw, Alice, 8
Magnet designation, 437–438
Malone, Beverly, 395
Malpractice, 495, 502–503
actions with, 507
advanced practice nursing risks and, 498–499 claim trends, 500–501, 501t, 502t
evolving health-care climate and, 496–498 independent practice risk of, 506
insurance as risk-management tool, 507, 508t risk reduction strategies, 509b
risks of
civil lawsuits, 498
federal health program exclusion, 499
   licensure or state certification exposures, 498–499 settings and risk of
collaborative practice, 506–507
   employed nurses, 505–506 state laws and, 504
strategies to avoid, 507, 508t, 509b tort reform and, 504
Managed care organizations (MCOs), 414, 448, 498
Managed health-care program, 158, 159b. See also Health plan (HP) Marginal cost, 186
Market segment, 170
Master of Science in Nursing (MSN), 19, 46, 48 Master’s advanced practice nurse case manager, 251b Meaningful use (MU), 387
Mediated roles
advanced practice and partnerships, 200–201 clinical relationships, 206
collaboration models, 203–206, 204f, 205b, 205t core competencies, 201
clinical and professional leadership, 202–203, 202f coaching, 202–203, 202f
collaboration, 202–203, 202f
consultation, 202–203, 202f
ethical decision-making skills, 202–203, 202f research skills, 202–203, 202f
exemplars: enacting advanced practice roles, 211, 218 acute care nurse practitioner, 210b, 211b advanced practice nurse interview questions, 209 certified nurse-midwife, 213b, 214b
certified registered nurse anesthetist, 217b, 218b clinical nurse specialist, 212b, 213b
primary care nurse practitioner, 214b, 215b rural health nurse practitioner, 216b, 217b
interprofessional teaming, 207–209, 207f, 208t professional nursing connections, 209
Medical dominance, 60
Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (MACRA), 162 Medicare Advantage Value-Based Insurance Design (VBID) Model, 372b Medicare Intravenous Immune Globulin (IVIG) demonstration, 372b Medicare Part B Physician Fee Schedule (MPFS), 162
Meditation, 290

Merit-based Incentive Payment (MIPS), 162 Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), 289 A Midwife’s Tale (Ulrich), 4
Mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR), 290 Ministry of Health (MOH), 69
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), 87 Mood stabilizers, 112
Moral courage, 517
Moral distress, 517 Morton, William T. G., 7 Motivation, 309, 310b
Motivational interviewing, 311
Multidisciplinary collaboration, 139–141, 139f, 207f

N
National Academy of Medicine (NAM), 32
National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists (NACNS), 22t, 47, 246, 432
National Association of Community Health Centers (NAHC), 176
National Association of Nurse Practitioners in Women’s Health, 22t National Board for Certification of Medical Interpreters
(NBCMI), 342
National Board of Certification and Recertification for Nurse Anesthetists (NBCRNA), 115, 116b
National Cancer Institute (NCI), 347
National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH), 279, 282b, 286, 288b
National Center for Cultural Competence (NCCC), 335, 349–350 National Certification Corporation (NCC), 116b
National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA), 265, 410 National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN), 15, 46, 107,
130, 175, 200, 223
National Database of Nursing Quality Indicators (NDNQI), 166
National Healthcare Quality and Disparities Report (QDR), 327–328, 329b, 330
National Healthcare Quality Report (NHQR), 326 National Health Institute, 63
National Institutes of Health (NIH), 271b, 485 National Institutes of Nursing Research (NINR), 271b National League for Nursing (NLN), 7, 47
National Library of Medicine (NLM), 236
National Nurse Residency and Training Consortium, 54 National Nurses Associations (NNAs), 62, 74
National Organization of Nurse Practitioner Faculty (NONPF), 11, 22t, 86, 174, 385, 417
National Organization of Public Health Nurses (NOPHN), 6 National Patient Safety Foundation (NPSF), 207
National plan and provider enumeration system (NPPES), 449 National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB), 499–500, 501t, 509 National Priorities Partnership, 165
National Provider Identifier (NPI) number, 125, 163, 246b National Quality Forum (NQF), 165, 410
National Quality Strategy (NQS), 327, 327b, 415
National Standards for Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services (CLAS), 336b, 340–341



Natural products, 282, 282b, 287–289, 288b
Naylor, Mary, 383
Negligence, 498
Neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), 27 Neonatal nurse practitioner (NNP), 27 Nerve blocks, 31
Net Patient Service Revenue, 182, 183
Nightingale, Florence, 131, 173, 240, 280, 411
Normative group, 36
North American Nursing Diagnosis Association-International (NANDA-I), 295
NP. See Nurse practitioner
Nurse anesthetist (NA), 3, 7–8, 44
Nurse case manager. See Case management, in advanced practice nursing (APN)
Nurse-Managed Health Clinics (NMHCs), 153 Nurse-midwives, 3, 5–7
Nurse performance measurement, 407, 428
accountability and, 409–410
action recommendations, 424
administration, 426–427
advocacy, 427
education, 426
practice, 425–426
research, 426
demands on, 408–409
evaluation approaches and models for, 419 group, system, and societal levels, 421–424 individual level, 420–421
   structure, process, and outcome measures, 420 expectations, 415–416
health-care values and, 410–411 quality and, 410, 416
access, cost, and quality, 412–413 definitions and frameworks, 411–412, 412t group level, 417
individual level, 417
recent initiatives, 413–415
societal level, 418–419
       systems level, 417–418 Nurse practice act (NPA), 82
Nurse practitioner (NP), 20, 24, 44, 200, 431–432
certificate program, 45
collaborative practice, 136–137
competencies, 25–26 distribution by certification, 24t evolution of, 3, 12–16
numbers of, 20t
prescriptive authority of, 106–107 primary care, 214b, 215b
residency and fellowship programs, 54–55 roles of, 26–29
rural health, 216b, 217b
Nurses Association of Jamaica (NAJ), 69 Nursing, professional, 3, 5, 167b–168b

Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia (NMBA), 90 Nursing and Midwifery Council of Botswana (NCMB), 63 Nursing for the Future (Brown), 9
Nursing practice, regulated, 301–302, 303b Nursing process, 223
Nursing science, with DNP/PhD partnership, 53 Nursing Specialty Certification Program (NSCP), 97

O
Objectivity, 522, 522t, 524f Observations, 311
“Observations in Anesthesia” (Magaw), 8
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), 462, 485 Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (ODPHP),
310, 325
Office of Inspector General (OIG), 490 Office of Minority Health (OMG), 334 O’Grady, Eileen, 240
O’Grady, Porter, 379–380
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA), 161 Ongoing professional practice evaluation (OPPE), 115, 119 Open-ended questions, affirmations, reflective listening, and
       summarizing (OARS) interview strategy, 311 Operational competencies, 383
Opportunity cost, 187
Opportunity recognition, 383
Organizational  hierarchy, 143
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 57
Outcome and assessment information set (OASIS), 414 Outcome measures, 420
Outcomes management (OM), 464

P
Palliative Care Program, 363 Parallel model, 204, 205t Paternalism, 240
Patient advocacy, 245t
Patient and Family Education Services (PFES), 353 Patient autonomy, 240b
Patient care coordinator (PCC), 152
Patient-centered medical home (PCMH), 129, 154, 261
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), 19, 45, 131, 249, 252, 261
Patient Safety Organization (PSO), 419 Pauli, Wolfgang, 294
Pay-for-performance program, 184 Pediatric advanced life support (PALS), 125
Pediatric Nursing Certification Board (PNCB), 116b Peplau, Hildegard, 9
Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), 293
Performance. See Nurse performance measurement Performance improvement (PI), 464
Personal mastery, 149
Personal protective equipment (PPE), 269, 408



Physical readiness, 309
Physician assistant (PA), 13, 85, 115
Physician Consortium for Performance Improvement (PCPI), 166, 169b
Physician Quality Reporting Initiative (PQRI), 162 Physician Quality Reporting System (PQRS), 162 Placebo effect, 290–291
Plagiarism, 403
Point-of-service (POS) plans, 159, 159b Policy. See Public policy
Population/Problem, intervention, comparison, outcome, time (PICOT) format, 234, 235b
Portfolio, professional career
of advanced practice nurse, 122, 124
attestation page, 125
credentials component, 123, 125
practice-based evidence component, 123, 124f practitioner contact information, 123
Position Statement on Practice Doctorate in Nursing, 19, 433 Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 291, 293
Poverty, 330b, 331b
Practice management, 441, 446, 460 business plan and structure for
competition, 455
competitive analysis, 455–456
concept, 455
corporation, 452–453
financial, 456
limited liability corporation, 453 management team and personnel, 456 market analysis, 455
marketing plan, 456
operations, 456
partnership, 452
repayment projections, 456–457
sole proprietorship, 452
consultants for, 451
documentation and quality assurance process for, 463–465 equipment and suppliers for, 459, 460b–461b, 461–462 fees, reimbursement, and billing procedures for
billing, 458, 459b
fee establishment, 457
   reimbursement, 457–458 financing options for, 457 independent advantages, 442, 442b independent barriers, 443
key questions for, 444–445
licensing, tax, and insurance requirements clinical laboratory license, 449
conventional commercial insurance policies, 450–451 employer identification number, 449
federally controlled substances license, 448 managed care organization, 448
Medicaid provider number, 448 Medicare, 448–449

national provider identifier (NPI) number, 449 professional liability insurance, 449–450
state-controlled substances license, 448
state nursing license and advanced practice license/ certification, 447
   state tax identification number, 449 location for
demographics, 454
geographical, 454
professional climate, 454
    professional relationships, 454 marketing strategies for, 465–466 name and image for, 453
need for, 445
personnel for, 462–463
policies and procedures for, 465, 465b start-up, 443, 444b
strategy for, 445
   timeline for, 445, 446b–447b Preauthorization, of health services, 159
Preferred provider organizations (PPOs), 159, 159b, 251 Prescription Drug Plans (PDPs), 372b
Prescriptive authority, of advanced practice nurse (APN), 105 barriers to, 110–111
development of
certified nurse-midwife and, 107
certified registered nurse anesthetist and, 108 clinical nurse specialists and, 107–108
   nurse practitioner and, 106–107 future for, 112
prescribing patterns, 111–112
statutory and regulatory change to authorize, 108 collaborative formulary, 109–110
negative or exclusionary formulary, 109 open formulary, 110
physician role in, 110
       regulator established formulary, 109 Pretests, 311
Primary care nurse practitioner (NP), 214b, 215b Primary care physicians (PCPs), 72
Primary care providers (PCPs), 173, 205 Primary care transformation, 372b Primary health care (PHC), 57
Primary source verification, 117 Problem-solving, 223
Process  measures, 420
Productivity, 197
Professional discipline, 489–490
Professional dissonance, 147–148
Professional elitism, 142–143
Professional organization, educational content and, 22t Professional practice models (PPM), 438
Profit and loss (P&L) statements, 180–181, 182f
Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE), 251–252 Proximate cause, 498



Psychological readiness, 309
Psychomotor domain, 314–315
Publication, of advanced practice nurse (APN), 393 book or video reviews, 395
folder share, 404
formal review process for, 402 decision types, 401
evaluative questions, 400–401, 400b required disclosures, 401
literature review for, 398 databases, 399–400
impact factor, 400
open access, 402–403
plagiarism, 403 preparation for
expository style, 397
organization, 396–397
query letters, 398
question sort, 397
   resources for, 397–398 writing approaches for
books, 396
chapters in books, 395–396 journal articles, 396
letters to editor, 394–395 monographs, 395
newsletter articles or reports, 395 published minutes, 394
writing habit for, 394 writing workshops for, 403
Public health emergency (PHE), 128 Public health movement, 5
Public health nurse, 250
Public health services and systems research (PHSSR), 398 Public policy, advanced practice nurse (APN) and, 172–173
advanced practice registered nurse, 174–175 Affordable Care Act, 176–177
Consensus Model, 175–176
reimbursement, 178–179
state-to-state comparisons, 177, 178f

Q
Qigong, 282
Quality Data Model (QDM), 166 Quality improvement (QI), 272
Quality measures, nursing-sensitive, 168 Quality Payment Program (QPP), 162 Quantum physics, 293–294
Quasi-contracts, 473

R
Racial justice, 231
Racism, 230–231
Randomized control trials (RCTs), 234, 398
Reality shock, 42

Reasoning patterns
analytic processes, 226–228
intuition, 228
   narrative thinking, 228–229 Reed, Sean, 246b
Reference groups, 34, 36
Referral, 211
Registered nurse (RN), 66, 106, 207, 246, 253
Reiki, 282, 291–292, 298
Reimbursement, 178–179, 264–265, 434–435, 457–458, 459b
COVID-19 pandemic and, 494 health plan and, 161–163
Reiter, Frances, 9, 10
Relational leadership, 375
Republic of South Africa (RSA), 65–66, 66b Research, advanced practice nurse (APN) and, 266
in action, 276
diabetes self-management telehealth education, 275 educational intervention to improve delirium, 275 evaluation of risk factor, 274–275
   home delivery of intravenous chemotherapy, 275 application to conduction of
barrier removal for, 273–274
change agency and systems approach to, 272–273 mentoring and leadership, 271–272
   problem-solving and research application, 269–271, 271b competencies, 267–268, 268b
completion of, 274
role of, 267
Research literature, 232
Resource-Based Relative Value Scales (RBRVS), 194 Resource management, 180, 199
budgets
operating process, 189–192 types of, 187–189, 189f
cost concepts, 185
direct versus indirect costs, 186 incremental versus opportunity costs, 187 total versus unit costs, 186
   variable versus fixed costs, 186, 186f cost containment, 195–198
expenses, 185
maximizing revenue, 192–195
revenue, 181–185, 184b
   structure, 181, 182f Respondeat superior theory, 507 Revenue, 181–185, 182f, 184b Richmond, Mary, 250
Rights, individual, 516t
The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF), 114, 130, 131, 244,
369, 412
Rogers, Martha, 136 Role
acquisition, 38–39, 39b, 40b ambiguity, 59–60



clarity, 59–60
strain, 40, 42–43
stress, 40, 41–42, 41b
Royal College of Nursing (RCN), 86
Rural health nurse practitioner (NP), 216b, 217b

S
Sanger, Margaret, 173, 240
Scope of practice (SOP), of advanced practice nurse (APN), 144, 200, 474, 484, 488
challenges to, 125–127
data maintenance on clinical and administrative performance of, 125–126
decreasing barriers to continuity of care in, 126 limitations, 161
   managed care panels and, 126 Secondary source verification, 117 Selective serotonin uptake inhibitors, 112 Self-care, 278–279, 278b, 297–298
Self-reflection, 279
Sequential model, 204–205, 205t Servant leadership, 373–374 Settlement House Movement, 5
Shared decision-making (SDM), 129, 130, 154–155
Shared governance, 153–154 Shared model, 205, 205t Shared savings program, 184
Sheppard-Towner Maternity and Infancy Act, 6 Silver, Henry, 13, 45, 173
Simulation, 391
Situational leadership, 373
Sleep, 278
Smith, Dorothy, 10
Social determinants of health (SDOH), 264, 310 Social intelligence, 377–378
Socialization, 36–37, 38b, 39–40 Social relativism, 514t, 515 Socrates, 521
SOP. See Scope of practice
Standard Occupational Classification Policy Committee (SOCPC), 12 Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) system, 247b
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI), 293
Statutory and regulatory prescriptive authority. See Prescriptive authority, of advanced practice nurse (APN)
Step-variable costs, 186, 186f Stress, strain and
antecedents of, 40–41
   relaxation techniques for, 289–291 Structural-functionalist theory, 34, 35
Structural measures, 420
Subrogation, 477
Substandard care, 498 Sunrise Model, 334f
Surgical intensive care unit (SICU), 274 Sustainable growth rate (SGR), 162

Symbolic-interactionist theory, 34, 35
Symphonology, 513, 520, 522
Systems-level advocacy, 242–243
Systems thinking, 149

T
Teaching, advanced practice nurse (APN) and
basic skills for, 306–323, 308b, 308t, 310b, 313t, 314t, 316b, 317t, 319b, 320b
education plan, 311–312, 313t, 316–321, 316b, 317t, 319b, 320b
learning evaluation, 322
objectives, 313–315, 314t outcomes as guide for, 315
educator role, 322–323 framework for
effective teacher qualities, 307, 308t learning, 309
teaching, 309
learner assessment and, 307 needs, 308–309, 308b readiness to learn, 309, 310b strategies for, 311
methods
case study, 318, 320b clinical case, 318, 319b clinical conference, 318
demonstration, 320
discussion, 316–318, 317t
lecture, 315–316, 316b
multimedia, 319–320
simulations, 320–321
technologies, 320
unfolding cases, 318–319
Team learning, 149
Technical expert panels (TEPs), 166
Thailand Nursing and Midwifery Council (TNMC), 88 The Joint Commission (TJC), 114, 115, 119, 273, 410
Therapeutic touch (TT), 280, 282, 291–292
Thinking Fast and Slow, 224 Thomas, Sophia, 246b
Thomas-Kilmann Index (TKI), 361 Titles, proliferation of, 60
To Err Is Human, 369 Toffler, Alvin, 130
Tort reform, 504
Total cost, 186
Transactional leadership, 374
Transcreation, 346
Transdisciplinary collaboration, 139–141, 139f Transformational leadership, 374
Transitional Care Model (TCM), 261 Tricyclic antidepressants, 112
Truth, Sojourner, 240
Tuberculosis, 289



U
Ulrich, Laurel, 4–5
Unequal Treatment, 230
Unidisciplinary collaboration, 139–141, 139f Unification Model, 54
Unit cost, 186
United Kingdom (UK), 74
Unit practice councils (UPCs), 154 Universal Provider Datasource (UPD), 117 University of Botswana (UB), 63 Unlicensed assistive personnel (UAP), 196 Utilitarianism, 514t, 515
Utilization Review Accreditation Commission (URAC), 117

V
Vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC), 501 Value-based purchasing (VBP), 157, 158
Value capitulation, 42 Variable costs, 186, 186f
Veterans Administration (VA), 251 Veterans’ Health Affairs (VHA), 15 Virtual reality (VR), 391–392

Vision, shared, 149
Volatile-uncertain-complex-ambiguous (VUCA) environments, 375

W
Wakefield, Mary, 174
Wald, Lillian, 5, 173, 240, 250 Watchful Care (Bankert), 7 Weissman, David, 363–364
West African College of Nursing (WACN), 62
Western Pacific. See World Health Organization (WHO) White supremacy, 231
World Health Organization (WHO), 7, 57, 269, 408
Africa, 62–67, 66b
Eastern Mediterranean region, 70–74, 71t Europe, 74–83, 75b, 76b
Lithuania, 83–84
Netherlands, 84–87
Pan American Health Organization, 67–70 Southeast Asia, 87–90, 88f
sustainable development goals, 62 Western Pacific, 90–101





















CHAPTER 1
Adams Hampton, I. (1893). fte administration of anesthetics. In
Nursing: It’s principles and practice (pp. 331–336). Saunders.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (1996). The essentials of master’s education for advanced practice nursing.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2014). The DNP by 2015: A study of the institutional, political, and professional issues that facilitate or impede establishing a post-baccalaureate doctor of nursing practice program. http://www.aacn.nche.edu/dnp/DNP- Study.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2015). Re-envisioning the clinical education of advanced practice registered nurses. https:// www.aacn.nche.edu/aacn-publications/white-papers/APRN- Clinical-Education.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2020). DNP fact sheet. http://www.aacnnursing.org/News-Information/Fact-Sheets/ DNP-Fact-Sheet
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2007). AANA announces support of doctorate for entry into nurse anesthesia practice by 2025.
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2020). Credential verifi- cation. http://www.aana.com
American College of Nurse-Midwives. (2020). Basic facts about certi- fied nurse midwives. http://www.midwife.org
American Nurses Association. (1965). Educational preparation for nurse practitioners and assistants to nurses: A position paper.
American Nurses Association. (1980). Nursing: A social policy statement.
American Nurses Association. (1993). Nursing facts from the American Nurses Association. In Primary health care: The nurses’ solution.
American Nurses Association. (1996). Scope and standards of advanced practice registered nursing.
American Nurses Association Congress for Nursing Practice. (1976). Definition: Nurse practitioner, nurse clinician, and clinical nurse specialist.
Baer, E. (1982). The conflictive social ideology of American nursing, 1893: A microcosm [Unpublished dissertation]. New York Univer- sity, School of Education.
Bankert, M. (1989). Watchful care: A history of America’s nurse anesthe- tists. Continuum.
Bigbee, J. L., & Amidi-Nouri, A. (2000). History and evolution of advanced nursing practice. In A. B. Hamric, J. A. Spross, & C. M.

Hanson (Eds.), Advanced nursing practice: An integrative approach
(2nd ed., pp. 4–32). W. B. Saunders.
Brush, B., & Capezuti, E. A. (1996). Revisiting “A Nurse for All Set- tings”: fte nurse practitioner movement, 1965–1995. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 8(1), 5–11.
Busen, N., & Engleman, S. (1996). fte CNS practitioner preparation: An emerging role in advanced practice nursing. Clinical Nurse Spe- cialist: The Journal of Advanced Nursing, 10(3), 145–150.
Callaway, B. J. (2002). Hildegard Peplau: Psychiatric nurse of the century.
Springer.
Christman, L. (1998). Advanced practice nursing: Is the physician’s assistant an accident of history or a failure to act? Nursing Outlook, 46(2), 56–59.
Cockerham, A. Z., & Keeling, A. W. (2012). Rooted in the mountains, reaching the world: Stories of nursing and midwifery at Kentucky’s Frontier School. Butler Books.
Coss, C. (Ed.). (1989). Lillian D. Wald: Progressive activist. fte Fem- inist Press.
Cronenwett, L., Dracup, K., Grey, M., McCauley, L., Meleis, A., & Salmon, M. (2011). fte doctor of nursing practice: A national workforce perspective. Nursing Outlook, 59, 9–17.
Daniels, D. G. (1989). Always a sister: The feminism of Lillian D. Wald.
fte Feminist Press.
D’Antonio, P. (2010). American nursing: A history of knowledge author- ity and the meaning of work. fte Johns Hopkins University Press.
Dawley, K. (2001). Ideology and self-interest: Nursing, medicine, and the elimination of the midwife. Nursing History Review (9), 99–126.
DeWitt, K. (1900). Specialties in nursing. American Journal of Nursing, 1(1), 14–17.
Dock, L. L. (1901). In I. A. Robb, L. L. Dock, & M. Banfield (Eds.), The transactions of the Third International Congress of Nurses with the Reports of the International Council of Nurses (p. 15). Congress.
Dunphy, L. M. (2011, October). fte power of influence: Leadership in action. Nurse Leader, 22–24, 44.
Dye, N. S. (1984). Mary Breckenridge, the frontier nursing service, and the introduction of nurse-midwifery in the United States. In J. Leavitt & R. L. Numbers (Eds.), Women and health (pp. 336–337). University of Wisconsin.
Edgar, C. J. (1911). fte remedy for the midwife problem. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 63, 882.

1



Edwards, J., Oppewal, S., & Logan, C. (2003). Nurse-managed pri- mary care: Outcomes of a faculty practice network. Journal of American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 15(12), 563–569.
Ehrenreich, B. (2000). Introduction: Emergence of nursing as a po- litical force. In D. Mason, J. Leavitt, & M. Chafee (Eds.), Policy and politics in nursing and health care (4th ed., pp. xxxiii–xxxvii). Saunders.
Ehrenreich, B., & English, D. (1973). Witches, midwives, and nurses: A history of women healers. fte Feminist Press.
Ehrenreich, B., & English, D. (1978). For her own good—150 years of expert advice to women. Anchor Books.
Fairman, J. (1999). Delegated by default or negotiated by need? Phy- sicians, nurse practitioners, and the process of clinical thinking. Medical Humanities Review, 13(1), 38–58.
Fairman, J. (2002). fte roots of collaborative practice: Nurse practi- tioner pioneers’ stories. Nursing History Review, 10, 159–174.
Fairman, J. (2008). Making room in the clinic: Nurse practitioners and the evolution of modern healthcare. Rutgers University Press.
Ford, L. C. (1991). Advanced nursing practice: Future of the nurse practitioner. In L. H. Aiken & C. M. Fagin (Eds.), Charting nursing’s future: Agenda for the 1990s (pp. 287–299).
J. B. Lippincott.
Ford, L. C., & Silver, H. K. (1967). fte expanded role of the nurse in child care. Nursing Outlook, 15, 43–45.
Fulton, J. (2002). Defining our practice. Clinical Nurse Specialist: The Journal for Advanced Nursing, 16(4), 1–3.
Geolot, D. (1987). Nurse practitioner education: Observations from a national perspective. Nursing Outlook, 35, 132–135.
Glass, L. (2009). Leading the Way, the University of Minnesota School of Nursing, 1909-2009. University of Minnesota.
Hamilton, B. E., Martin, J. A., Osterman, M. J. K., Curtin, S. C., & Mathews, T. J. (2015). Births: Final data for 2014. National Vi- tal Statistics Reports, Vol. 64, No. 12. National Center for Health Statistics.
Hamric, A. B., Spross, J. A., & Hanson, C. M. (2013). Advanced nurs- ing practice: An integrative approach (5th ed.). W. B. Saunders.
Hayes, E. (1985). fte nurse practitioner: History, current conflicts, and future survival. Journal of Community Health, 34, 144–147.
Holt, N. (1998). Confusion’s masterpiece: fte development of the physician assistant profession. Bulletin of the History of Medicine, 72, 246–278.
Institute of Medicine. (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, ad- vancing health. A report of the Committee on the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Initiative on the Future of Nursing at the Institute of Medicine. National Academies Press.
Jacox, A. K. (2002). Dr. Loretta Ford’s observations on nursing’s past and future. Nursing and Health Policy Review, 1(2), 153–164.
Joel, L. A. (2011). Dimensions of professional nursing (10th ed.).
McGraw-Hill.
Jolly, E. (1927). Nuns of the battlefield. Providence Visitor Press.
Kalisch, P. A., & Kalisch, B. J. (1986). The advance of American nursing
(2nd ed.). Little, Brown.

Keeling, A. (2007). Nursing and the privilege of prescription. fte Ohio State University Press.
Keeling, A. W. (2010). “Alert to the necessities of the emergency”: U.S. nursing during the 1918 influenza pandemic. Public Health Re- ports (Washington, D.C.: 1974), 125(Suppl. 3), 105–112. https:// doi.org/10.1177/00333549101250S313
Kennedy, H. P. (2020). 2020 International Year of the Midwife— An unexpected challenge. Midwifery, 87, 102732. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.midw.2020.102732
Kobrin, F. E. (1984). fte American midwife controversy: A crisis of professionalization. In J. Leavitt & R. L. Numbers (Eds.), Women and health (pp. 318–326). University of Wisconsin.
Komnenich, P. (1998). fte evolution of advanced practice in nursing. In C. M. Sheehy & M. McCarthy (Eds.), Advanced practice nurs- ing: Emphasizing common roles (pp. 9–41). F.A. Davis.
Leininger, M., Little, D. E., & Carnevali, D. (1972). Primex. American Journal of Nursing, 72(7), 1274–1277.
Lincoln, P. (2000). Comparing CNS and NP role activities: A repli- cation. Clinical Nurse Specialist: The Journal of Advanced Nursing, 14(6), 1–4.
Livanos, N. (2017). ftree APRN roles prevail in the VA, with CRNAs left behind. Journal of Nursing Regulation, 8(1), 46–48.
Lusk, B., Cockerham, A. Z., & Keeling, A. W. (2019). Highlights from the history of advanced practice nursing in the United States. In M. F. Tracy & E. T. O’Grady (Eds.), Advanced practice nursing: An integrative approach (6th ed., pp. 1–24). Elsevier.
Lynaugh, J. E., & Fairman, J. (1992). New nurses, new spaces: A pre- view of the AACN history study. American Journal of Critical Care, 1(1), 19–24.
MacDorman, M. F., & Declercq, E. (2019). Trends and state variations in out-of-hospital births in the United States, 2004–2017. Birth (Berkeley, Calif.), 46(2), 279–288. https://doi.org/10.1111/birt.12411
Magaw, A. (1899). Observations in anesthesia. Northwestern Lancet, 19, 207.
Magaw, A. (1906). A review of over fourteen thousand surgical anesthe- sias. Bulletin of the American Association of Nurse Anesthetists, 7, 62. Marchione, J., & Garland, T. N. (1997). An emerging profession? fte
case of the nurse practitioner. Image: The Journal of Nursing Schol-
arship, 29(4), 335–337.
Menard, S. (1987). fte CNS: Historical perspectives. In S. Menard (Ed.), The clinical nurse specialist: Perspectives on practice (pp. 2–3). John Wiley & Sons.
Mirr, M. P., & Snyder, M. (1995). Evolution of the advanced practice nursing role. In M. P. Mirr & M. Snyder (Eds.), Advanced practice nursing (pp. 13–21). Springer.
Moxley, J. H., 3rd. (1968). fte predicament in health manpower.
American Journal of Nursing, 68(7), 1486–1490.
Mundinger, M. O. (2005). Who’s who in nursing: Bringing clarity to the doctor of nursing practice. Nursing Outlook, 53(4), 173–176.
Mundinger, M. O., Kane, R. I., Lenz, E. R., Totten, A. M, Tsai, W., & Cleary, P. D. (2000). Primary care outcomes in patients treated by nurse practitioners or physicians: A randomized trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 283(1), 59–68.



National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists. (2020). http:// www.NACNS.org/history
National Center for Health Statistics. (2018). Birth data. https://www
.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/births.htm/
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2020). http://www
.ncsbn.org
O’Brien, P. (1987). “All a woman’s life can bring”: fte domestic roots of nursing in Philadelphia, 1830–1885. Nursing Research, 36(1), 12–17.
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. (2010).
Phillips, S. J. (2011). 23rd annual legislative update: As healthcare re- forms, NPs continue to evolve. Nurse Practitioners, 36(1), 30–52.
Porter, R. (2006). Cambridge history of medicine. Cambridge University Press.
Pulcini, J., & Wagner, M. (2001). Perspectives on education and practice issues for nurse practitioners and advanced practice nursing. In Nurse practitioner/advanced practice nursing roles in the United States. Education/Practice Subgroup of the Interna- tional Nurse Practitioner/ Advanced Practice Nursing Network. ICN.
Reiter, F. (1966). fte nurse clinician. American Journal of Nursing, 66(2), 274–279.
Reverby, S. (1987). Ordered to care: The dilemma of American nursing, 1850–1945. Cambridge University Press.
Rothstein, W. G. (1958). American physicians in the nineteenth century: From sect to science. Johns Hopkins Press.
Roy, C., & Obloy, M. (1978). fte practitioner movement—toward a science of nursing. American Journal of Nursing, 78(10), 1698–1702.
Sills, G. (1983). fte role and function of the clinical nurse specialist. In N. L. Chaska (Ed.), The nursing profession: A time to speak up. McGraw-Hill.
Silver, H. K., Ford, L. C., & Stearly, S. G. (1967). A program to in- crease health care for children: fte pediatric nurse practitioner program. Pediatrics, 39(5), 756–768.
Sparacino, P. S. A. (1986). fte clinical nurse specialist. Nursing Prac- tice, 1(4), 215–228.
Sparacino, P. S. A. (1990). A historical perspective on the develop- ment of the clinical nurse specialist role. In P. S. A. Sparacino,
D. M. Cooper, & P. A. Manarik (Eds.), The clinical nurse specialist: Implementation and impact (pp. 3–9). Appleton & Lange.
Stanley, J. M. (2009). Reaching consensus on a regulatory model: What does this mean for APRNs? Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 5, 99–104.
Stone, S. (1990). A complete practice of midwifery. In L. T. Ulrich (Ed.), A midwife’s tale: The life of Martha Ballard (pp. 12–40). Alfred Knopf.
Sullivan-Marx, E. M., McGivern, D. O., Fairman, J. A., & Greenberg,
S. A. (2013). Nurse practitioners: The evolution and future of ad- vanced practice nursing (5th ed.). Springer.
Sultz, H. A., Henry, O., Kinyon, J., Buck, G., & Bullough, B. (1983). Nurse practitioners: A decade of change. Nursing Outlook, 31, 137–141.

ftatcher, V. S. (1953). History of anesthesia with emphasis on the nurse specialist. Lippincott.
Towers, J. (1995). Celebrating our 30th anniversary as nurse prac- titioners and our 10th anniversary as an academy. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 7(6), 267–270.
Ulrich, L. T. (1990). A midwife’s tale: The life of Martha Ballard, based on her diary, 1785–1812. Alfred A. Knopf.
U.S. Department of Labor. (1920). Children’s Bureau (Publication No. 61). U.S. Government Printing Office.
Washington Post. (2020). Covid-19 exposes the need for midwives. https:// www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2020/05/05/midwifes-tale/

CHAPTER 2
American Academy of Nurse Practitioners. (2013). Standards for nurse practitioner practice in retail-based clinics. https://www
.aanp.org/advocacy/advocacy-resource/position-statements/ standards-for-nurse-practitioner-practice-in-retail-based-clinics
American Academy of Nurse Practitioners (2020). NP fact sheet.
  https://www.aanp.org/about/all-about-nps/np-fact-sheet American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2006). Position state-
ment on the practice doctorate in nursing. http://www.aacn.nche
.edu/DNP/DNPPositionStatement.htm
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2008). APRN Consensus Model. https://www.aacnnursing.org/ Education Resources/APRN Education/APRN Consensus Model
American Association of Colleges of Nursing APRN Workgroup. (2017). Common APRN doctoral level competencies. https://www
.aacnnursing.org/Portals/42/AcademicNursing/pdf/Common- APRN-Doctoral-Competencies.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2019). Fact sheet: The doctor of nursing practice. https://www.aacnnursing.org/Portals/42
/News/Factsheets/DNP-Factsheet.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2020). CNL frequently asked questions. https://www.aacnnursing.org/CNL/About/FAQs
American Association of Critical Care Nurses. (2020). Get certified.
https://www.aacn.org/certification/advanced-practice
American Association of Critical Care Nurses. (2020). Scope and standards for acute care clinical nurse specialist practice. https:// www.aacn.org/~/media/aacn-website/nursing-excellence
/standards/128101cnsstds2010.pdf
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2019). Certified registered nurse anesthetists fact sheet. https://www.aana.com
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2020a). Scope of nurse anesthesia practice. https://www.aana.com/docs/default-source
/practice-aana-com-web-documents-(all)/scope-of-nurse-anesthesia- practice.pdf?sfvrsn=250049b1_2
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2020b). Certified registered nurse anesthetists fact sheet. https://www.aana.com/membership
/become-a-crna/crna-fact-sheet
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2020c). Chronic pain management guidelines. https://www.aana.com/docs/default- source/practice-aana-com-web-documents-(all)/chronic-pain- management-guidelines.pdf?sfvrsn=d40049b1_4



American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2013). Standards for nurse practitioner practice in retail based clinics. https://www
.aanp.org/advocacy/advocacy-resource/position-statements
    /standards-for-nurse-practitioner-practice-in-retail-based-clinics American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2020). Take a closer
look at the AGNP acute care nurse practitioner role. https://
www.aanp.org/news-feed/are-you-considering-a-career-as-an- acute-care-nurse-practitionerhttps://www.aanp.org/news-feed
    /are-you-considering-a-career-as-an-acute-care-nurse-practitioner American College of Nurse-Midwives. (2014). Competencies for mas-
ter’s level midwifery education.  https://www.midwife.org/acnm
/files/ACNMLibraryData/UPLOADFILENAME/000000000291
/Competencies-for-Master%27s-Level-Midwifery-Education- Dec-2014.pdf
American College of Nurse-Midwives. (2019). Midwifery education and   doctoral   education.  https://www.midwife.org/acnm/files
/acnmlibrarydata/uploadfilename/000000000079/PS%20Midwifery
%20Education%20and%20Doctoral%20Preparation 
%20190927.pdf
American College of Nurse-Midwives. (2020a). Essential facts about midwives: Midwives and birth in the United States. https://www
.midwife.org
American College of Nurse-Midwives. (2020b). Pathways to mid- wifery education. https://portal.midwife.org/education/education- pathway?reload=timezone
American Nurses Association. (2020). Scope of practice. https://www
.nursingworld.org/practice-policy/scope-of-practice/
American Nurses Credentialing Center. (2016). Psychiatric-mental health nurse practitioner certification. https://www.nursingworld.org
/our-certifications/
American Pregnancy Association. (2020). Midwives. https://american- pregnancy.org/labor-and-birth/midwives/https://portal.midwife
   .org/education/education-pathway?reload=timezonehealth APRN Consensus Workgroup. (2020). National Council of  State
Boards of Nursing. https://www.ncsbn.org/aprn-consensus.htm
Association for Perioperative Registered Nurses. (2020). APRNs in the perioperative environment. https://aorn.org/guidelines
/clinical-resources/position-statements
Auerbach, D., Buerhaus, P., & Staiger, D. (2020). Implications of the rapid growth of the nurse practitioner workforce in the US. Health Affairs, 39(2). https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2019.00686
Campaign for Action. (2020). Future of nursing: Dashboard. https:// campaignforaction.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/r2
   _CCNA-0029_2019-Dashboard-Indicator-Updates_1-29-20.pdf
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019a). Making the vaccine decision: Addressing common concerns. https://www.cdc.gov
/vaccines/parents/why-vaccinate/vaccine-decision.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019b). A child’s health is the public’s health. https://www.cdc.gov/childrenindisasters/features
/children-public-health.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020). Creating pos- itive childhood experiences. https://www.cdc.gov/injury/features
/prevent-child-abuse/index.html

Center to Advance Palliative Care. (2019, September). America’s care of serious illness: A state-by-state report card on access to palliative care in our nation’s hospitals. National Palliative Care Research Center.
Clinical Nurse Specialist Practice and Education. (2019). fte National CNS Competency Task Force. National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists. http://www.nacns.org/wp-content/uploads/201 7/10/2017-Draft-CNS-Core-Competencies-FINAL.pdf
Consensus Model for APRN Regulation: Licensure, Accreditation, Certification and Education. (2008). Completed through the work of the APRN consensus work group and the National Council of State Boards of Nursing APRN Advisory Committee. http://www
.aacn.nche.edu/Education/pdf/APRNReport.pdf
Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anesthesia Educational Programs. (2019). Standardsforaccreditationofnurseanesthesiaprogramspractice doctorate. https://www.coacrna.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/01
/Standards-for-Accreditation-of-Nurse-Anesthesia-Programs- Practice-Doctorate-revised-October-2019.pdf
Doctor of Nursing Practice. (2020). Will the DNP make it over the top as the new nursing standard by 2025? https://www.doctorofnursing- practicednp.org/2020/01/will-the-dnp-make-it-over-the-top-as- the-new-standard-for-advanced-practice-nursing-by-2025/
Edmunds, M. (2018). Learning from the past to prepare for the fu- ture. Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 14(10), 14–16. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.njrpra.2018.09.013
Emami, A., Jaffe, D., Minton-Foltz, P., Parker, G., Manfredi, S., Braungart, T., Marley, K., Cooley, L., & Siem, S. (2017). Nursing schools and academic health centers: Toward improved alignment and a synergistic partnership. Journal of Multidisciplinary Health- care, 10, 271–276. http://doi.org/10.2147/JMDH.S129663
Hanson, M. (2015). Role to the clinical nurse specialist in the jour- ney to magnet recognition. AACN Advanced Critical Care, 26(1), 50–57. http://doi.org/10.4037/NCI.0000000000000068
Hospice and Palliative Nurses Association. (2020). Advanced certified hospice and palliative nurse (ACHPN®). https://advancingexpertcare
.org/HPNA/HPCC/CertificationWeb/ACHPN.aspx
Institute of Medicine. (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. National Academies Press.
Institute of Pediatric Nursing. (2020). Pediatric nursing workforce data.
  http://www.ipedsnursing.org/pediatric-nursing-workforce-data Laurant, M., van der Biezen, M., Wijers, N., Watananirun, K.,
Kontopantelis, E., & van Vught, A. J. (2018, July 16). Nurses as
substitutes for doctors in primary care. Cochrane Database System- atic Reviews, 7(7), CD001271. http://doi.org/10.1002/14651858. CD001271.pub3
Lippincott Solutions. (2018). Nursing salary report 2018. http:// lippincottsolutions.lww.com/blog.entry.html/2018/01/09/ nursing_salary_repor-7ftk.html
Meghani, S., & Hinds, P. (2015). Policy brief: fte Institute of Medi- cine report “Dying in America”: Improving quality and honoring individual preferences near the end of life. Nursing Outlook, 63, 51–59.
Miller-Hoover, S. (2020). 2020 year of the nurse: Midwives. https:// www.rn.com/featured-stories/year-of-the-nurse-midwives/



Morgan, P., Smith, V., Berkowitz, T., Edelman, D., Van Houtven, C., Wollson, S., Hendri, C., Everett, C., White, B., & Jackson, G. (2019). Impact of physicians, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants on utilization and costs for complex patients. Health Affairs, 38(6), https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/full/10.1377/ hlthaff.2019.00014
National Academy of Medicine. (2020). A consensus study from the National Academy of Medicine: The future of nursing 2030. https:// nam.edu/publications/the-future-of-nursing-2020-2030/
National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists. (2020). Fact sheet.
https://www.aana.com
National Association of Neonatal Nurses. (2020). Highlights from NANN’s history. http://nann.org/about/history
National Association of Nurse Practitioners in Women’s Health White Paper. (2020). The essential role of women’s health nurse practitioners. https://www.npwh.org/lms/filebrowser/file?fileName=NPWH
%20White%20Paper%20fte%20Essential%20Role%20of%20 WHNPs%20final%207.13.2020.pdf
National Board on Certification and Recertification of Nurse Anes- thetists. (2020). Criteria for recertification. AANA. https://www
.nbcrna.com/continued-certification
National Cancer Institute. (2020). Cancer stat facts: Common cancer sites. https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/common.html
National Conference of State Legislatures. (2017). Retail health clin- ics: State regulation and law. https://www.ncsl.org/research/health
/retail-health-clinics-state-legislation-and-laws.aspx
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2016). NCSBN’s APRN campaign for consensus: State progress toward uniformity. http:// www.ncsbn.org/5404.htm
Naylor, M. D., & Kurtzman, E. T. (2010). fte role of nurse practi- tioners in reinventing primary care. Health Affairs, 29, 893–899. http://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2010.0440
Nurse Journal. (2020). Neonatal care nursing + salary, careers and jobs outlook. https://nursejournal.org/neonatal-nursing
/neonatal-care-career-outlook/
Nurse Practitioners in Women’s Health. (2020). BOlder women’s health coalition. https://www.npwh.org/pages/bolderwomen
Oncology Nursing Credentialing Corporation. (2020). Fact sheet.
https://www.oncc.org/files/factsheet.pdf
Phillips, S. J. (2020). 32nd Annual APRN legislative update: Improv- ing access to high-quality, safe, and effective healthcare. The Nurse Practitioner, 45(1), 28–55.
Reuter-Rice, K., Madden, M., Gutknecht, S., Foerster, A. (2016). Acute care pediatric nurse practitioner. Journal of Pediatric Health Care, (30), 3, 241–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.[edjc/2-17/01.009
Salamanca-Balen, N., Seymour, J., Caswell, G., Whynes, D., & Tod, A. (2018, February). fte costs, resource use and cost-effectiveness of clinical nurse specialist-led interventions for patients with palliative care needs: A systematic review of international evidence. Palliative Medicine, 32(2), 447–465.
Sun, E., Miller, T., Moshfegh, J., & Baker, L. (2018). Anesthesia care composition and surgical outcomes. Anesthesiology, 129, 700–709. https://doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0000000000002275

ftarpe, N. (2015). The midwife as first surgical assistant. http://www
.midwife.org
Tracy, M. (2015). Demonstrating the value of clinical nurse specialists in acute and critical care. AACN Advanced Critical Care, 26(1), 33–34. http://doi.org/10/4037/NCI.0000000000000069
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019). Occupational employment and wages, May 2019; Nurse Midwives. https://www.bls.gov/oes/current
/oes291161.htm
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. (2016, May 29). VA proposes to grant full practice authority to advanced practice registered nurses [News release].
Van Hoover, C., & Holt, L. (2016). Midwifing the end of life: Expand- ing the scope of modern midwifery practice to reclaim palliative care. Journal of Midwifery and Women’s Health, 61(3), 306–314. http://doi.org/10.1111/jmwh.12454
Villasenor, S., & Krouse, H. J. (2016). Can the use of urgent care clin- ics improve access to care without undermining continuity in pri- mary care? Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, 28(6), 335–341. http://doi.org/10.1002/2327-6924.12314
Vogel, W. (2010). Advanced practitioners in oncology: Meeting the challenges. Advanced Practitioner.com, 1(1), 13–18.
Wolf, M. (2013). Palliative sedation in nursing anesthesia. AANA Journal, 81(2), 113–117.

CHAPTER 3
Ball, E. (2011). A social purpose model for nursing. Nursing Forum, 46(3), 152–156.
Benner, P. E. (2001). From novice to expert: Excellence and power in clinical nursing practice (2nd ed.). Addison-Wesley. [Classic]
Brykczynski, K. A. (2000). Role development of the advanced practice nurse. In A. B. Hamric, J. A. Spross, & C. M. Hanson (Eds.), Advanced nursing practice (2nd ed., pp. 107–134). W. B. Saunders. [Classic]
Chen, Y. M., Chen, S. H., Tsai, C. Y., & Lo, L. Y. (2007). Role stress and job satisfaction for nurse specialists. Journal of Advanced Nurs- ing, 59(5), 497–509.
Creakbaum, E. L. (2011). Creating and implementing a nursing role for RN retention. Journal for Nurses in Staff Development, 27(1), 25–28. Dreyfus, H. I., & Dreyfus, S. E. (1977). Uses and abuses of multi-attribute
and multi-aspect model of decision-making [Unpublished manu-
script]. Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research. Berkeley, CA: University of California. [Classic]
Graf, A. C., Jacob, E., Twiggy, D., & Nattabi, B. (2020). Contempo- rary nursing graduates’ transition to practice: A critical review of transition models. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 10(3), 111.
Hardy, M. E., & Hardy, W. L. (1988a). Managing role strain. In
M. E. Hardy & M. E. Conway (Eds.), Role theory (2nd ed., pp. 241–255). Appleton & Lange. [Classic]
Hardy, M. E., & Hardy, W. L. (1988b). Role stress and role strain. In M. E. Hardy & M. E. Conway (Eds.), Role theory (2nd ed., pp. 159–239). Appleton & Lange. [Classic]
Joel, L. A. (1994). Maybe a pot watcher but never an ostrich. American Journal of Nursing, 94(46), 7.



Joel, L. A. (2011). Kelly’s dimensions of professional nursing (10th ed.).
McGraw-Hill.
Kramer, M. (1974). Reality shock. Mosby. [Classic]
Moore, E. R., & Watters, R. (2013, October 22). Educating DNO students about critical appraisal and knowledge translation. Inter- national Journal of Nursing Education Scholarship, 10, 1515–2012.
Murray, S. M., Sundin, D., & Cope V. (2019). Benner’s model and Duchscher’s theory: Providing the framework for understanding new graduate nurses’ transition to practice. Nurse Education in Practice, 34(1), 199–203.
Pleshkan, V., & Hussey, L. (2020). Nurse practitioners’ experiences with role transition: Supporting the learning curve through pre- ceptorship. Nurse Education in Practice, 42(1), 42.
Roberts, S. J., Tabloski, P., & Bova, C. (1997). Epigenesis of the nurse practitioner role revisited. Journal of Nursing Education, 36(2), 67–73.
Santucci, J. (2004). Facilitating the transition into nursing practice.
Journal for Nurses in Staff Development, 20(6), 274–286.
Schumacher, K. L., & Meleis, A. I. (1994). Transitions: A central con- cept in nursing. Image: The Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 26(2), 119–127.
Starr, K. (2006). Becoming a registered nurse: fte nurse extern expe- rience. Journal of Continuing Education in Nursing, 37(2), 86–92.
Terry, D. R., Nguyen, H., Peck, B., Smith, A., & Phan, H. (2020). Communities of practice: A systematic review and metasynthesis of what it means and how it really works among nursing students and novices. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 29(3–4), 370–380.
Watzlawick, P., Weakland, J. H., & Fisch, R. (2011). Change: Princi- ples of problem formulation and problem resolution. W.W. Norton & Company.

CHAPTER 4
Aaronson, L. (2005, January). The road to interdisciplinary research: NINR and the NIH roadmap [Paper presentation]. 2005 AACN Doctoral Education Conference, Coronado, CA.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2004). AACN po- sition statement on the practice doctorate nursing. https://www
.aacnnursing/portals42/News/Position.statement/DNP
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2006). The essentials of doctoral education for advanced nursing practice. http://www
.aacnnursing.org
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2010). National Insti- tute of Nursing Research: Promoting America’s health through nursing science. http://www.aacnnursing.org
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2011). Talking points, the DNP. http://www.aacnnursing.org
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2012). FY 2012 appro- priations. http://www.aacnnursing.org
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2015a). The doctor of nursing practice: Current issues and clarifying recommendations. http:// www.aacnnursing.org/Portals/42DNP/DNP-Implementation

American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2015b). fte new white paper on the doctor of nursing practice: Current issues and clari- fying recommendations. The Journal of Professional Nursing, 31(5), 378.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2016). 2015 Annual report: Leading excellence and innovation in nursing. http://www
    .aacnnursing.org/News-Information/Publications/Annual-Reports American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2019a). 2019 Annual reporting celebrating 50 years as the voice for academic nursing.
http://www.aacnnursing.org
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2019b). Institutions offering doctoral programs in nursing and degrees conferred. http:// www.aacnnursing.org
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2019). Certified registered nurse anesthetist’s fact sheet. http://www.aana.com/
American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2020). Historical time- line. https://www.aanp.org
American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2020). NP fact sheet.
https://www.aanp.org/all-about-nps/np-fact-sheet
American College of Nurse-Midwives. (2012, July 1). Position state- ment: Midwifery education and the doctor of nursing practice (DNP). https://www.midwife.org/aacnm/files-Nurse-Midwife
American College of Nurse-Midwives. (2014). Essential facts about mid- wives. https://www.midwife.org/Essential-Facts-about-Midwives
American Nurses Association. (2011). Advanced nursing practice: A new age in health care. https://www.nursingworld.org-48227e/ globalassets/docs/ana/aprnmedia
Apold, S. (2008). fte doctor of nursing practice: Looking back mov- ing forward. Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 4(2), 101–107.
Auerbach, D. I., Martsolf, G., Pearson, E. A., Taylor, M. Z., Muchow, A., Spetz, J., & Dower, C. (2015). The DNP by 2015: A study of the institutional, political, and professional issues that facilitate or impede establishing a post baccalaureate doctor of nursing practice program. Rand Health, RAND Corporation.
Bellini, S., & Cusson, R. M. (2011). fte role of the practitioner. In
H. M. Dreher & M. E. Smith Glasgow (Eds.), Role development for doctoral advanced practice nursing (pp. 123–140). Springer.
Bennis, W. G., & O’Toole, J. (2005). How business schools lost their way. Harvard Business Review, 83, 96–104.
Bloch, J. (2007). The DNP degree as entry into nurse practitioner prac- tice: Is this nursing’s answer to eliminate disparities in health care access to vulnerable populations? [Paper presentation]. fte First National Conference on the Doctor of Nursing Practice: Meanings and Models, Drexel University, Annapolis, MD.
Boyer, E. L. (1990). Scholarship reconsidered: Priorities for the professo- riate. fte Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.
Broome, M. E. (2005). Constructive debate and dialogue in nursing.
Nursing Outlook, 53, 167–168.
Brown, M. A., & Crabtree, K. (2013). fte development of practice scholarship in DNP programs: A paradigm shift. Journal of Profes- sional Nursing, 29(4), 330–337.



Bush, C. T., & Lowery, B. (2016). Postgraduate nurse practitioner education: Impact on job satisfaction. The Journal for Nurse Practi- tioners, 12(4), 226–234.
Consensus Model for APRN Regulation: Licensure, accreditation, certifi- cation & education. (2008, July 7). http://www.aacnnursing.org./ education-resources/APRNReport.pdf
Cronenwett, L., Dracup, K., Grey, M., McCauley, L., Meleis, A., & Salmon, M. (2011). fte doctor of nursing practice: A national workforce perspective. Nursing Outlook, 59, 9–17.
Dahnke, M. D., & Dreher, H. M. (2011). Philosophy of science for nursing practice: Concepts and application. Springer.
DePalma, A., & McGuire, D. (2005). Research. In A. Hamric,
J. Spross, J., & C. Hanson (Eds.), Advanced nursing practice: An integrative approach (pp. 257–300). WB Saunders.
Dracup, K., Cronenwett, L., Meleis, A. I., & Benner, P. E. (2005). Reflections on the doctor of nursing practice. Nursing Outlook, 53, 77–182.
Dreher, H. M., Fasolka, B., & Clark, M. (2008). Navigating the de- cision to pursue an advanced degree. Journal of Men in Nursing, 3(1), 51–55.
Dreher, H. M., & Smith Glasgow, M. E. (2011). Global perspectives on the professional doctorate. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 48, 403–408.
Edwards, J., Rayman, K., Diffenderfer, S., & Stidham, A. (2016). Strategic innovation between PhD and DNP programs: Collab- oration, collegiality, and shared resources. Nursing Outlook, 64(4), 312–320.
Fink, D. (2006). fte professional doctorate: Its relativity to the PhD and relevance for the knowledge economy. International Journal of Doctoral Studies, 3, 35–44.
Flinter, M. (2005, September). Residency programs for primary care nurse practitioners in federally qualified health centers: A service perspective. 2005 Online Journal of Issues in Nursing.
Florczak, K. L. (2010). Research and the doctor of nursing practice: A cause for consternation. Nursing Science Quarterly, 23(1), 13–17.
Ford, L. (1975). An interview with Dr. Loretta Ford. Nurse Practi- tioner, 1(1), 9–12.
Institute of Medicine. (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. Committee on the Robert Wood Johnson Foun- dation Initiative on the Future of Nursing at the Institute of Med- icine. National Academies of Science.
Kendall-Gallagher, D., & Breslin, E. (2013). Developing DNP stu- dents as adaptive leaders: A key strategy in transforming healthcare. Journal of Professional Nursing, 29(5), 259–263.
Kirschling, J. M. (2014, January 30). Reflections on the future of doctoral programs in nursing [Paper presentation]. AACN Doctoral Confer- ence, Naples, FL.
McKenna, H. (2005). Doctoral education: Some treasonable thoughts.
International Journal of Nursing Studies, 42(3), 245–246.
Martsolf, G. R., Nguyen, P. G., Freund, D., & Poghosyan, L. (2017). What we know about postgraduate nurse practitioner residency

and fellowship program. The Journal for Nurse Practitioner, 13(7), 482–487.
Miller, J. E. (2011). Reflective response 2. In H. M. Dreher &
M. E. Smith Glasgow (Eds.), Role development for doctoral advanced nursing practice (pp. 388–392). Springer.
Montgomery, O. C. (2011). Reflective response 1. In H. M. Dreher &
M. E. Smith Glasgow (Eds.), Role development for doctoral advanced nursing practice (pp. 384–387). Springer.
Mundinger, M. O. (2005). Who’s who in nursing: Bringing clarity to the doctor of nursing practice. Nursing Outlook, 53, 173–176.
Mundinger, M. O., & Kane, R. L. (2000). Health outcomes among patients treated by nurse practitioners or physicians. Journal of the American Medical Association, 283, 2521–2524.
Mundinger, M. O., Kane, R. L., Lenz, E., Totten, A., Tsai, W., Cleary, P., & Shelanski, M. L. (2000). Primary care outcomes in patients treated by nurse practitioners or physicians: A randomized trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 283, 59–68.
Murray, B. (2000, January). fte degree that almost wasn’t: fte PsyD comes of age. Monitor on Psychology, 31, 1–5. http://www.apa.org
/monitor/jan00/ed1.htmlhttp://www.apa.org/monitor/jan00/ed1
.html
National Academy of Medicine. (2020). A consensus study—The future of nursing 2020. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists. (2012). Criteria for the evaluation of clinical nurse specialists master’s practice doctor- ate and post-graduate certificate educational programs. http://www
.nacns.org/doc/CNSEducationCriteria.pdf
National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists. (2015, June 17).
NACS position statement on the doctor of nursing practice. http://www
   .nacns.org; http://docplayer.net/search/?q=National+Association
National Institutes of Health. (2018a). Research project success rates by NIH institute for 2018. https://report.nih.gov/success_rates
/Success_BylC.cfm
National Institutes of Health. (2018b). HHS budget in brief 2018.
  http://www.hhs.gov/about/budget/budget-in-brief/nih/index.html National League for Nursing Accreditation Commission for Education
in Nursing, Inc. (2020). Accreditation manual standards criteria.
http://www.cnea.nln.org/mission.and.values
National Organization of Nurse Practitioner Faculties. (2018). DNP: Entry to nurse practitioner practice by 2025. https://www.nompf
.org/resource/resmgr/dnp/v3_05.2018
Nelson, J. M., Cook, P. F., & Raterink, G. (2015). fte evolution of a doctor of nursing practice capstone process: Programmatic revi- sions to improve the quality of student projects. Journal of Profes- sional Nursing, 29(6), 370–380.
Nicely, K. L. W., & Fairman, J. (2015). Post graduate nurse practi- tioner residency programs: Supporting transition to practice. American Medicine, 90(6), 707–709.
Nyquist, J., & Wulff, D. H. (2000). Recommendations from national studies on doctoral education. Re-envisioning the PhD project. https:// depts.washington.edu/envision/resources/ConcernsBrief.pdf



O’Sullivan, A. L. (2005). fte practice doctorate in nursing. Mentor, 16, 2–3, 12.
O’Sullivan, A. L., Carter, M., Marion, L., Pohl, J., & Werner, K. (2005). Moving forward together: fte practice doctorate in nurs- ing. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 10, 1–14.
Peterson, D. R. (1982). Origins and development of the doctor of psychology concept. In G. R. Caddy, D. C. Rimm, N. Watson, &
J. H. Johnson (Eds.), Educating professional psychologists (pp. 19–38). Transaction Books.
Pittman, E. (2005). Luther Christman: A maverick nurse—a nursing legend. Trafford Publishers.
Potempa, K. M., Redman, R. W., & Anderson, C. A. (2008). Capac- ity for the advancement of nursing science: Issues and challenges. Journal of Professional Nursing, 24, 329–336.
Sanchez, C., & Alberto, C. (2018). Nurse practitioner role. Nurse Educator, 43(1), 42–44.
Terhaar, M. F., & Sylvia, M. (2015). Scholarly work products of the doctor of nursing practice: One approach to evaluating scholar- ship, rigor, and quality. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 25, 163–174.
fte Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, P.L.111-148. (2010). Summary of the Affordable Care Act. https://www.healthcare.gov/ where-can-i-read-the-affordable-care-act/
Waldrop, J. (2015). Update on the doctor of nursing practice 2015.
The Journal of Nurse Practitioners, 11(3), A23–A24.
Waldrop, J., Caruso, D., Fuchs, M. A., & Hypes, K. (2014). EC as PIE: Five criteria for executing a successful DNP final project. Journal of Professional Nursing, 30(4), 300–306.
Wittmann-Price, R., Waite, R., & Woda, D. L. (2011). fte role of the educator. In H. M. Dreher & M. E. Smith Glasgow (Eds.), Role development for doctoral advanced practice nursing (pp. 161–180). Springer.

CHAPTER 5
2019 on the modification of the Law of 10 May 2015 on the Practice of Healthcare Professions, BS 14 May 2019. National Rural Health Resource Center. Retrieved from https://www.ruralcenter.org/ search? search_api_views_fulltext=+Law+of+10+May+2015++on+ the+Practice+of+Healthcare+Professions%2C+BS+14+May+2019.  on 9/27/2021.
Ackerman, M. H., Norsen, L., Martin, B., Wiedrich, J., & Kitzman,
H. J. (1996). Development of a model of advanced practice. Amer- ican Journal of Critical Care, 5, 68–73. [Classic]
Adu-Gyamfi, S., Brenja, E. (2016). Nursing in Ghana: A search for Flor- ence Nightingale in an African city. International Scholarly Research Notices 2016, 9754845. https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/9754845
Al-Darazi, F., & Al-Maqbali, M. (2020). Advanced practice nursing in the Eastern Mediterranean Region. In S. B. Hassmiller & J. Pulcini (Eds.), Advanced practice nursing leadership: A global perspective. Springer Nature.
Arrêté du 18 juillet 2018 fixant la liste des pathologies chroniques sta- bilisées prévue à l’article R. 4301-2 du code de santé publique, Pub. L. No. NOR: SSAH1817587A (2018).

Arrêté du 18 juillet 2018 fixant les listes permettant l’exercice infirmier en pratique avancée en application de l’article R. 4301-3 du code de santé publique, Pub. L. No. NOR: SSAH1817591A (2018).
Arrêté du 12 aoÛt 2019 modifiant l’arrêté du 18 juillet 2018 relatif au régime des études en vue du diplôme d’Etat d’infirmier en pratique avancée, Pub. L. No. ESRS1919812A (2019).
Australian Nursing and Midwifery Accreditation Council. (2010). http://www.nursingmidwiferyboard.gov.au/Accreditation.aspx
Ayre, T. C., & Bee, T. S. (2014). Advanced practice nursing in Sin- gapore [Editorial]. Proceedings of Singapore Healthcare, 23(4), 269–270.
Ball, J. (2009). Implementing nurse prescribing: An updated review of current practice internationally. Trends and issues in nursing (Monograph No. 25). International Council of Nurses.
Begley, C., Murphy, K., Higgins, A., Elliot, N., Lalor, J., Sheerin, F., Coyne, I., Comiskey. C., Normand, C., Casey, C., Dowling, M., Devane, D., Cooney, A., Farrelly, F., Brennan, M., Meskell, P., & MacNella, P. (2010). Evaluation of clinical nurse and midwife spe- cialist and advanced nurse and midwife practitioner roles in Ireland (SCAPE) final report. National Council for the Professional Devel- opment of Nursing and Midwifery in Ireland.
Bergstrom, P., & Lindh, V. (2018). Developing the role of the Swedish advanced practice nurse through blended learning master’s pro- gram: Consequences of knowledge organization. Nurse Education in Practice, 28, 196–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nepr.2017.10.030
Berland, Y. (2003). Mission: Coopération des professions de sante: Le transfert de tâches et de compétences. Rapport d’étape.
Board of Nursing Resolution. (2002). Nursing specialty certification pro- gram BON RES. NO. 14 s 1999 and Guidelines for implementation BON RES. No. 118-s 2002. PRC Printing Office.
Bruijn-Geraets, D. P., Bessem-Beks, M. C. M., van Eijk-Hustings, Y. J. L., & Vrijhoef, H. J. M. (2015). VoorBIGhouden, Eindrapportage Evaluatieonderzoek Art. 36a Wet BIG met betrekking tot de inzet van de Verpleegkundig Specialist en de Physician Assistant. Maas- tricht: Maastricht UMC+, Patient en Zorg, KEMTA.
Bruijn-Geraets, D. P., van Eijk-Hustings, Y. J. L., van Castro-Soerland, N., Vrijhoef, H. J. M. (2016). VoorBIGhouden, Eindrapportage Evaluatieonderzoek Art. 36a Wet Big met betrekking tot de inzet van de Verpleegkunig Specialist en de Physician Assistant: Endos- copie, electieve cardioversie, defibrillatie. Maastricht: Masstricht UMC+, Patient en Zorg, KEMTA.
Bryant-Lukosius, D., & DiCenso, A. (2004). A framework for the introduction and evaluation of advanced practice nursing roles. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 48(5), 530–540. [Classic]
Bryant-Lukosius, D., Spichinger, E., Martin, J., Stoll, H., Kellerhals, S. D., Fleidner, M., Grossman, F., Henry, M., Hermann, L., Koller, A., Schwendimann, R., Ulrich, A., Weibel, L., Callen, S. B., & De Geest, S. (2016). Framework for evaluating the impact of advanced practice nursing roles. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 48(2), 201–209. https://doi.org/10.1111/jnu.12199
Buchan, J., & Calman, L. (2005). Skill-mix and policy change in the health workforce: Nurses in advanced roles (Working paper). http:// www.oecd.org/dataoecd/30/28/33857785.pdf



Buchan, J., Temido, M., Fronteira, I., Lapao, L., & Dussault, G. (2013). Nurses in advanced roles: A review of acceptability in Por- tugal. Rev. Latino-Am. Enfermagem, 21(Spec), 38–46.
Bundesverband Pflegemanagement, Katholischer Pflegeverband, VPU. (2019). Excellenz in der Pflege.
Canadian Nurses Association. (2006). Canadian nurse practitioner ini- tiative: Implementation and evaluation toolkit for nurse practitioners in Canada.
Canadian Nurses Association. (2009a). Recommendations of the Cana- dian nurse practitioner initiative: Progress report.
Canadian Nurses Association. (2009b). Clinical nurse specialist [Posi- tion statement].
Canadian Nurses Association. (2014). Core competencies for the clinical nurse specialist.
Canadian Nurses Association. (2016a). Position statement: Clinical nurse specialist.
Canadian Nurses Association. (2016b). Position statement: Nurse practitioner.
Canadian Nurses Association. (2017a). Fact sheet federal income tax act and regulations: Recognition of nurse practitioners.
Canadian Nurses Association. (2017b). National nursing framework on medical assistance in dying.
Canadian Nurses Association. (2019). Advanced practice nursing a Pan-Canadian framework.
Canadian Nurses Association. (2020). Canada welcomes first-ever state of the world’s nursing report [Press release]. https://www
.cna-aiic.ca/en/news-room/news-releases/2020/canada-welcomes- first-ever-state-of-the-worlds-nursing-report
Carryer, J., Adams, S. (2020). Advanced practice nursing in New Zealand. In S. Hassmiller & J. Pulcini (Eds.), Advanced practice nurs- ing leadership: A global perspective (pp. 127–140). Springer Nature.
Cassiani, S. H. G., Canaveral, L. K. R., & LaGrappe, D. (2020). Ad- vanced practice nursing in Latin America and the Caribbean. In S. Hassmiller & J. Pulcini (Eds.), Advanced practice nursing leadership: A global perspective (pp. 115–125). Springer Nature.
Chao, Y. M. (2008). Nursing care in Taiwan (p. 30). Taiwan Depart- ment of Health.
Chin, J. J., Tsay, S. L., & Tung, H. H. (2015). Scope of practice and legislation for nurse practitioners in Taiwan. Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, 27(9), 497–500. https://doi
.org/10.102/2327-6924.12248
Debout, C. (2014). La filière clinique en soins infirmiers, éléments de clarification dans le contexte français. Soins, 59(789), 26–31.
Debout, C. (2018). Infirmière de pratique avancée en France: Première esquisse. Soins, 63(824), 5–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.soin.2018.03.001
Debout, Christophe. (2019a). Évaluer la contribution de l’infirm- ier en pratique avancée. Soins, 64(835), 46–51. https://doi.org
/10.1016/j.soin.2019.03.012
Debout, C. (2019b). Le dispositif de formation universitaire de l’in- firmier en pratique avancée diplômé d’État. Soins, 64(835), 19–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soin.2019.03.016

Debout, C., & Hue, G. (2019). Mise en place de la fonction d’infirmier en pratique avancée diplômé d’État. Soins Cadres, 28(110), 11–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scad.2019.01.003
Décret no 2018-629 du 18 juillet 2018 relatif à l’exercice infirmier en pratique avancée, Pub. L. No. NOR: SSAH1812409D (2018).
Delamaire, M., & Lafortune, G. (2010). Nurses in advanced roles: A description and evaluation of experiences in 12 OECD countries (OECD Health Working Papers, No. 54). OECD Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1787/5kmbrcfms5g7-en
Department of Health. (2017). Developing a policy for graduate, spe- cialist and advanced nursing & midwifery practice consultation paper. Dublin, Ireland.
Department of Health. (2019). A policy on the development of graduate to advanced nursing and midwifery practice. Dublin, Ireland.
Deutscher Berufsverband für Pflegeberufe (DBfK); Österreichischer Gesundheits- und Krankenpflegeverband (ÖGKV); Schweizer Berufsverband der Pflegefachfrauen und Pflegefachmänner (SBK- ASI). (2013). Advanced Nursing Practice in Deutschland, Österre- ich und der Schweiz. Eine Positionierung von DBfK, ÖGKV und SBK. Deutscher Berufsverband für Pflegeberufe; Österreichischer Gesundheits- und Krankenpflegeverband; Schweizer Berufsverband der Pflegefachfrauen und Pflegefachmänner.
Deutscher Berufsverband für Pflegeberufe - DBfK Bundesverband
e.V. (Hg.). (2019). Informationen zum Pflegeberufegesetz. Wissenswertes, Tipps und Empfehlungen zur Bildungsreform für die Pflegeberufe.
DiCenso, A. (2008). Roles, research and resilience: fte evolution of advanced practice nursing. Canadian Nurse, 104(9), 37–40. [Classic]
DiCenso, A., Bryant-Lukosius, D., Bourgeault, I., Martin-Misener, R., Donald, F., Abelson, J., Kaasalainen, S., Kilpatrick, K., Kioke, S., Carter, N., & Harbman, P. (2010). Clinical nurse specialists and nurse practitioners in Canada: A decision support synthesis. http://www.chsrf
.ca/migrated/pdf/10-CHSRF-0362_Dicenso_EN_Final.pdf
Donald, F., Bryant-Lukosius, D., Martin-Misener, R., Kaasalainen, S., Kilpatrick, K., Carter, N., Harbman, P., Bourgeault, I., & DiCenso, A. (2010). Clinical nurse specialists and nurse practi- tioners: Title confusion and lack of role clarity. Canadian Journal of Nursing Leadership: Nursing Leadership, 23(Special Issue), 189–210.
Donato, A. S. (2009). Nurse practitioners in Holland: Definition, preparation, and prescriptive authority. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 21(11), 585–587.
Duignan, M., & Duignan, O. (2017). Physical activity: Is it time for emergency department nurses to step up? Emergency Nursing, 24, 23–27. https://doi.org/10.7748/en.2017.e1640
Dusseldorp, L. V., Groot, M. M., Adraansen, M. J., Van Vugh, A., Vissers, K. C., & Peters, J. W. B. (2018). What does the nurse practitioner mean to you? A patient orientated qualitative study in oncological/palliative care. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 28(2), 1–14. https://doi/org/10.1111.jocn.14653
Dusseldorp, L. V., Groot, M. M., Adraansen, M. J., Van Vugh, A., Vissers, K. C., & Peters, J. W. B. (2020). What does the nurse



practitioner mean to you? A patient oriented qualitative study in life-threatening illness and chronic diseases. Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners.
Facultad de Enfermería, Revista de Investigación. (2016, February 11). Programa: Celebración 75 años de la facultad de enfermería y 15 años de la revista Imagen Y Desarrollo [Manuscript].
Federaal Kenniscentrum voor de gezondheidszorg KCE. (2012). Chronische zorg van de toekomst zet patiënt aan het stuur —
50 actiepunten voor een diepgaande hervorming van de gezondheidszorg.
Feuchtinger, J. (2016). ANP — Studiert und doch nah an der Praxis.
Heilberufe, 68(6), 48–49.
Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare. (2019). Arrangements for outpatient care in Health Centers 2019: Outsourcing, personnel, work inputs and assignments [in Finnish]. http://www.julkari.fi
/handle/10024/138981
Finnish Nurses Association. (2016). New roles for nurses-quality for future social welfare health care services.
Fukuda, H., Miyauchi, S., Tonai, M., Ono, M., Magilvy, J. K., & Murashima, S. (2014). fte first nurse practitioner programme in Japan. International Nursing Review, 61(4), 487–490. https://doi
.org/10.1111/inr.12126
Gardner, A., & Gardner, G. (2005). A trial of nurse practitioner scope of practice. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 49(2), 135–145.
Gardner, A., Gardner, G., Middleton, S., & Della, P. R. (2009). fte status of Australian nurse practitioners: fte first national census. Australian Health Review, 33(4), 679–689.
Gardner, G., Chang, A., & Duffield, C. (2007). Making nursing work: Breaking through the role confusion of advanced practice nursing. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 57(4), 383–391. [Classic]
Gardner, G., Duffield, C., & Doubrovsky, A. (2017). fte structure of nursing: A national examination of titles and practice profiles. International Nursing Review, 64(2), 233–241.
Gardner, G., Gardner, A., Middleton, S., Della, P., Kain, V., Doubrovsky, A. (2010). fte work of nurse practitioners. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 66, 10, 2160–2169.
Gemeinsamer Bundesausschuss, Innovationsausschuss. (2020, May 31). HandinHand—Hausarzt und Pflegeexperte Hand in Hand—ANP Center zur Zukunftssicherung der medizinischen Basisversorgung in der Region. https://innovationsfonds.g-ba.de
/projekte/neue-versorgungsformen/handinhand-hausarzt-und- pflegeexperte-hand-in-hand-anp-center-zur-zukunftssicherung- der-medizinischen-basisversorgung-in-der-region.192
Goodyear. R. (2018). Nurse practitioners in Taiwan: Rules, role, op- portunities and challenges. Journal of Taiwan Nurse Practitioners, 5(1), 5–11.
Government of Ireland. (1998). Report of the Commission on Nursing: A blueprint for the future.
Gray, D., & Kgositau, M. (2019, April). Capacity building through tele- health and distance nursing education at the University of Botswana [Podium Power Point presentation]. Lead Nurse Africa Conference, Accra, Ghana.

Hanucharurnkul, S., Suwisith, N., Piasue, N., & Terathongkum, S. (2007). Characteristics and working situation of nurse practitioners in Thailand. http://www.icn-apnetwork.org
Hassmiller, S. B., Pulcini, J., & Kraik, A. (2020). Twenty-first cen- tury leadership. In S. B. Hassmiller & J. Pulcini (Eds.), Advanced practice nursing leadership: A global perspective (pp. 3–11). Springer.
Higgins, A., Downes, C., Varley, J., Tyrell, E., Normand, C., Doherty, C.P., Begley, C., & Elliott, N. (2018). Patients with epilepsy care experiences: Comparison between services with and without an epilepsy specialist nurse. Epilepsy & Behavior, 85, 85–94.
Hill, M., & Parker, J. (2015). Landscaping report for the development of the Chinese advanced nursing practice program. Report to the Chair, China Medical Board China Nursing Network.
Indian Nursing Council. (2016). Syllabus & regulations: Nurse practi- tioner in critical care [Postgraduate residency program].
International Council of Nurses. (2008a). Nursing care continuum— framework and competencies.
International Council of Nurses. (2008b). The scope of practice, stan- dards and competencies of the advanced practice nurse.
International Council of Nurses. (2020). Guidelines on advanced prac- tice nursing.
Jangland, E., Becker, D., Borjeson, S., Doherty, C., Gimm, O., Griffith, O., Johannson, A., Juhlin, C., Pawlow, P., Sicoutris, C., Yngman-Uhlin, P. fte development of a Swedish Nurse Practitioner Program – a request from clinicians and a process supported by US experience. The Journal of Nursing Education and Practice, 4(2), 2014. Retrieved from https:// doi.org/10.5430/jnep.v4n2p38 on 9/27/2021.
Juhlin, C., Pawlow, P., Sicoutris, C., & Yngman-Uhlin, P. (2014). fte development of a Swedish Nurse Practitioner Program—A request from clinicians and a process supported by US experience. Jour- nal of Nursing Education and Practice, 4(2), 38–48. https://doi
.org/10.5430/jnep.v4n2p38
Japanese Nursing Association. (2016). Nursing in Japan. https://www
.nurse.or.jp/jna/english/pdf/nursing-in-japan2016.pdf
Jokiniemi, K., Meretoja, R., & Pietila, A. M. (2018). Constructing content validity of clinical nurse specialist core competencies: Ex- ploratory sequential mixed-method study. Scandinavian Journal of Caring Sciences, 32(4), 1428–1436.
Jokiniemi, K., Pietila, A. M., & Mikkonen, S. (2020). Construct validity of nurse specialist core competency scale: An exploratory factor analysis.
Jokiniemi, K., Suutaria, A., Meretoja, R., Kotila, J., Axelin, A., Flink, M., & Fagerstrom, L. (2020). Evidence informed policy- making: Modelling nurses’ career pathway from registered to ad- vanced practice nurse. International Journal of Nursing Practice, 26(1), e12777.
Juniarti, N., Fuller, J., Zannettino, L., & Grant, J. (2019). Conceptual framework of the nursing centre for the integration of community health nursing practice, education, and research. Primary Health Care Research & Development, 20, e99. https://doi.org/10.1017
/S1463423619000331
Juniarti, N., Zannettino, L., Fuller, J., & Grant, J. (2018). Desir- able and undesirable outcomes of the nursing centre model as a



collaborative approach to service learning in community health in Indonesia. The globalisation of higher education (pp. 379–395). Palgrave Macmillan.
Kambli, K., Flach, D., Schwendimann, R., & Cignacco, E. (2015). Health care provision in a Swiss urban walk-in-clinic. Is advanced nursing practice a solution for a new model in pri- mary care? International Journal of Health Professions, 2(1), 64–72. https://doi.org/10.1515/ijhp-2015-0006
Kappert, J., & de Hoop, I (2019). Nurse practitioner professional compe- tency framework. V & VN.
Karll-Gesellschaft, A. (2018). Community health nursing in Deutsch- land. Konzeptionelle Ansatzpunkte für Berufsbild und Curricu- lum. DBfK Bundesverband e.V.
Kerr, L., & Macaskill, A. (2020). Advanced nurse practitioners’ (emer- gency) perceptions of their role, positionality and professional identity: A narrative inquiry. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 76, 1201–1210.
Kilpatrick, K., Dicenso, A., Bryant-Lukosius, D., Ritchie, J. A., Martin-Misner, R., & Carter, N. (2013). Practice patterns and perceived impact of clinical nurse specialist role in Can- ada: Results of a national survey. International Journal of Nurs- ing Studies, 50(11), 1524–1536. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.ijnurstu.2013.03.005
Ladd, E., & Schober, M. (2018). Nurse prescribing from the global vantage point: fte intersection between role and policy. Pol- icy, Politics and Nursing Practice, 19(1–2), 40–49. https://doi
.org/10.1177/1527154418797726
Leary, A., Maclaine, K., Trevatt, P., Padford, M., & Punshorn, G. (2017). Variations in job titles within the nursing workforce. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 26(23–24), 4945–4950. https://doi
.org/10.1111/jocn.13985
Leem, C. S., Choi, S. J., Lim, K. C., Jeon, J. S., Shin, Y. A., & Park,
J. (2019). Common scope of practice for advanced practice nurses in Korea derived from expert agreement. Journal of Korean Critical Care Nursing, 12(3), 35–49.
Lindblad, E., Hallman, E. B., Gillsjo, C., Lindblad, U., & Fager- stom, L. (2010). Experiences of the new role of advanced prac- tice nurses in Swedish primary health care—A qualitative study. International Journal of Nursing Practice, 16, 69–74. https://doi
.org/10.1111/j.1440-172X.2009.01810.x [Classic]
LOI n° 2016-41 du 26 janvier 2016 de modernisation de notre sys- tème de santé, Pub. L. No. NOR: AFSX1418355L (2016).
Lowe, G., & Plummer, V. (2019). Advanced practice in nursing and midwifery: fte contribution to healthcare in Australia. In
P. McGee & C. Inman (Eds.), Advanced practice in healthcare: Dynamic developments in nursing and allied health professions (pp. 51–63). Wiley Blackwell.
Madubuko, G. (undated). Nurse practitioner/advanced nursing practice development in West Africa: A proposal.
Magíster en Práctica Avanzada de Enfermería — Mención Paciente Crítico Adulto. (2016) http://postgrados.uandes.cl/mpae/
Maier, C. B. (2015). fte role of governance in implementing task-shifting from physicians to nurses in advanced roles in

Europe, U.S., Canada, New Zealand and Australia. Health Policy, 119(12), 1627–1635.
Maier, C. B. (2017). Advanced practice nurses (APN) in der Primärver- sorgung. Die Schwester Der Pfleger, 56(11), 60–63.
Maier, C. B., & Aiken, L. H. (2016) Task shifting from physicians to nurses in primary care in 39 countries: A cross-country com- parative study. European Journal of Public Health, 26(6), 927–934. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurpub/ckw098 [Classic]
Maier, C. B., Aiken, L. H., & Busse, R. (2017): Nurses in advanced roles in primary care. Policy levers for implementation (Hg. v. OECD Health Working Papers No. 98). OECD Publishing.
Manila, V. M. (2013). Evaluation of policies on advanced practice nursing in the Philippines. The University of the Philippines Manila Journal, 17, 39–58.
McBrien, B. (2018). Lisfranc injury: Assessment and management in emergency departments. Emergency Nursing. https://doi
.org/10.7748/en.2018.e1841
McGee, P. (2019). Influences on the development of advanced nursing practice in the UK. In Advanced Practice in Healthcare: Dynamic Developments in Nursing and Allied Health Professions (pp. 65–82). Wiley Blackwell.
McGee, P., & Inman, C. (2019). fte conceptualization of advanced practice. In Advanced practice in healthcare: Dynamic develop- ments in nursing and allied health professions (pp. 3–18). Wiley Blackwell.
Mendel, S., & Feuchtinger, J. (2009), Aufgabengebiete klinisch tätiger Pflegeexperten in Deutschland und deren Verortung in der inter- nationalen Advanced Nursing Practice. Pflege, 22(3), S. 208–216. https://doi.org/10.1024/1012-5302.22.3.208
Ministry of Health. (2009). Executive order, palliative care nurse spe- cialist [in Hebrew]. http://www.health.gov.il/hozer/ND79_09.pdf
Ministry of Health. (2013). Executive order. Nurse specialists [in Hebrew]. http://www.health.gov.il/hozer/ND99_2013.pdf
Ministry of Health, Division of Nursing. (2016a). Nursing activity. http://www.health.gov.il/unitsOffice/nursing/activity
Ministry of Health, Division of Nursing. (2016b). Annual report, 2015 Nursing Division [in Hebrew]. http://www.health.gov.il/hozer/ ND116_2016.pdf
Ministry of Health. (2019). Health manpower  statistics.  Singa- pore government. https://www.moh.gov.sg/resources-statistics/ singapore-health-facts/health-manpower
Ministry of Health of the People’s Republic of China. (2012). fte Chinese nursing career development plan (2011-2015). Clinical Nursing Management, 12(2), 5–8.
Ministère des Solidarités et de la Santé. (2018). Ma santé 2022: Un engagement collectif. https://solidarites-sante.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/ ma_sante_2022_synthese.pdf
Müller-Staub, M., Zigan, N., Händler-Schuster, D., Probst, S., Monego, R., & Imhof, L. (2015). Being cared for and caring: Liv- ing with multiple chronic diseases (Leila)—a qualitative study about APN contributions to integrated care. Pflege, 28(2), 79–91. https:// doi.org/10.1024/10125302/a000410



Nasaif, H. A. (2012). Knowledge and attitudes of primary care physicians toward the nurse practitioner role in the Kingdom of Bahrain. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 24(3), 124–131. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-7599.2011.00710.x
National Council for the Professional Development of Nursing and Midwifery. (2001). Framework for the establishment of advanced nurse practitioner and advanced midwife practitioner posts. Dublin, Ireland: National Council for the Professional Development of Nursing and Midwifery.
National Councilforthe Professional Developmentof Nursingand Mid- wifery. (2005). https://pna.ie/images/ncnm/ANP%20Evaluation% 2012_05.pdf
National Council for the Professional Development of Nursing and Midwifery. (2008). Framework for the establishment of clinical nurse/ midwife specialist posts (4th ed.). NCNM.
National Health Institute. (2002). Curriculum for the training of family nurse practitioners: Post-basic course.
New South Wales Health Department. (1998). Nurse practitioner services in NSW.
Nigenda, G., Magaña-Valladares, L., Cooper, K., & Ruiz-Lario, J. A. (2010). Recent developments in public health in the Americas. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 201(7), 729–750. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph7030729
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia. (2018). Nurse practitioner standards for practice.
Nursing and Midwifery Council of Botswana. (n.d.). Home [Facebook page]. Facebook. https://www.facebook.com/456697177810683/ posts/nursing-and-midwifery-council-of-botswana-nmcbthe- nursing-and-midwifery-council-/674725396007859/
Nursing and Midwifery Council of Ghana. (2016). Entry requirements for application to health training institutions in Ghana: Post-basic programs. https://www.nmcgh.org/t3f/en/
Nursing and Midwifery Council of Ghana. (2020). Examination fees and charges. https://www.nmcgh.org/t3f/en/documents-forms
Nursing Council of New Zealand. (2019). Nurse practitioner scope of practice: Guidelines for application.
O’Connor, L., Casey, M., Smith, R., Fealy,  G. M., Brien, D. O.,
O’Leary, D., Stokes, D., McNamara, M. S., Glasgow, M. E., & Cashin, A. (2018). fte universal, collaborative and dynamic model of specialist and advanced nursing and midwifery practice: A way forward? Journal of Clinical Nursing, 27, e882–e894. https://doi
.org/10.1111/jocn.13964
O’Keeffe, A., O’Grady, S., Cronin, F., Dolan, C., O’Hea, A., O’Shea, K. L., & Naughton, C. (2020). Evaluation of an emer- gency department falls pathway for older people: A patient chart review. International Emergency Nursing, 100869. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.ienj.2020.100869
Okyere, E., Mwanri, L., & Ward, P. (2017). Is task-shifting a solution to the health workers’ shortage in Northern Ghana? PLoS, 12(3), e0174631. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0174631
Offredy, M. (1999). fte nurse practitioner role in New South Wales: Development and policy. Nursing Standard, 13(43), 38–41.

Oh, E. G., Jang, Y., Park, J., Lee, H., Kim, H., Min, A., Kim, S.,
& Kwon, Y. (2019) Development of strategic plans for advanced nursing in Korea. Asian Nursing Research, 13(2019), 115–121.
Oita University of Nursing and Health Sciences. (2016). http://www
.oita-nhs.ac.jp/English/nurse_practioner_project
Pan American Health Organization. (2014). Strategy for universal ac- cess to health and universal health coverage: Toward consensus in the Region of the Americas. http://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?op- tion=com_docman&task=doc_view&Itemid=270&gid=2744 3&lang=en
Pan American Health Organization. (2015, April 18). Report on uni- versal access to health and universal health coverage: Advanced practice nursing summit [Manuscript].
Philippine Board of Nursing, (2008, August 19). Updates on the nurse certification program. Professional Regulations Commission. BON Newsletter, 3, 7.
Pilane, C., Neube, P., & Seitio, O. (2007). Ensuring quality in affili- ated health training institutions: Advanced diploma programmes in Botswana. http://www.icn-apnetwork.org/
Pommersberger, M. (2019). Deutsches Netzwerk für Advanced Prac- tice Nursing Advanced Nursing Practice. Safe the Date für den Expertenworkshop 2020.
Prashanth, M. P. (2017, May 30). Enhancing the autonomy of Indian nurses. Indian Journal of Medicine Ethics Online.
Pulcini, J. (2014): International development of advanced practice nursing. In A. B. Hamric, C. M. Hanson, M. F. Tracy, &
E. T. O’Grady (Eds.), Advanced practice nursing. An integrative approach (5th ed., pp. 133–145). Elsevier. [Classic]
Pulcini, J., Jelic, M., Gul, R., & Loke, A. L. (2010). An international survey on advanced practice nursing education, practice and regu- lation. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 42(1), 31–39.
Rogers, M., & Gloster, A. (2020). Advanced practice nursing in the United Kingdom. In S. B. Hassmiller & J. Pulcini (Eds.), Advanced practice nursing leadership: A global perspective (pp. 141–154). Springer Nature.
Roodbol, P. (2004). Survey carried out prior to the 3rd ICN-International Nurse Practitioner/Advanced Nursing Practice Network Conference. Network Conference. Groningen, the Netherlands.
Roodbol, P. (2005) Willing o’-the-wisps, stumbling runs, toll roads and song lines: Study into the structural rearrangement of tasks between nurses and physicians [Unpublished summary of doctoral thesis].
Roodbol, P. (2011). Update report on the global status of advanced prac- tice nurses and nurse practitioners for the APN Network Session. ICN Congress, Malta.
Royal College of Nursing. (2008). Advanced nurse practitioners—an RCN guide to the advanced nurse practitioner, role, competencies and programme accreditation.
Samba, S. (2007). Nursing center: Konsep dan Aplikasi. Yayasan Nursentra, Bandung (in Indonesian).
Sastre-Fullana, P., De Pedro-Gomez, J. E., Bennasar-Veny, M., Serrano-Gallardo, P., & Morales-Ascencio, J. M. (2014). Competency



frameworks for advanced practice nursing: A literature review.
International Nursing Review, 61(4), 534–542.
Sathira-Angkura, T., & Khwansatapornkoon, K. (2014). PEPPA frame- work for advanced practice nurse development [In ftai with En- glish abstract]. Journal of Nursing, 41(2), May–August 2557, 84–96.
Schober, M. (2007a). Development of advanced community nursing/ nurse practitioner roles and educational programmes in Oman, EM/NUR/392/E/R/07.07. WHO-EMRO.
Schober, M. (2007b). Development of a framework for advanced prac- tice nursing in Bahrain, assignment report EM/NUR/394/E/R07.7 [Unpublished]. WHO-EMRO.
Schober, M. (2013). Factors influencing the development of advanced practice nursing in Singapore [Doctoral thesis, Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield Hallam University archives]. http://shura.shu
.ac.uk/7799/
Schober, M. (2016). Introduction to advanced nursing practice: An international focus. Springer Nature. [Classic]
Schober, M. (2017). Strategic planning for advanced nursing practice.
Springer Nature. [Classic]
Schober, M. (2019). An international perspective of advanced nursing practice. In P. McGee & C. Inman (Eds.), Advanced practice health- care: Dynamic developments in nursing and allied health professions (pp. 19–38). Wiley Blackwell.
Schober, M., & Affara, F. (2006). Advanced nursing practice. Blackwell Publishing.
Schober, M., & Stewart, D. (2019). Developing a consistent approach to advanced practice nursing worldwide. International Nursing Review, 66(2), 151–156.
Seitio-Kgokgwe, O., Gauld, R. D. C., Hill, P. C., & Barnett, P. (2015). Development of the national health information systems in Botswana: Pitfalls, prospects and lessons. Online Journal of Public Health Informatics. https://doi.org/10.5210/ojphi.v7/2.5630
Seol, M., Shin, Y. A., Lim, K. C., Leem, C., Choi, J. H., & Jeong, J. S. (2017). Current status and vitalizing strategies of advanced prac- tice nursing in Korea. Perspectives in Nursing Science, 14(1), 37–44. https://doi.org/10.16952/pns.2017.14.1.37
Serena, A., Castellani, P., Fucina, N., Griesser, A. C., Jeanmonod, J., Peters, S., & Eicher, M. (2015). fte role of advanced nursing in lung cancer: A framework-based development. European Journal of Oncology Nursing, 19(6), 740–746. https://doi.org/10.1016
/j.ejon.2015.05.009
Sermeus, W., Eeckloo, K., Van der Auwera, C., & Van Hecke, A. (2018). Future of nursing: Improving health, driving change: Lessen uit de internationale literatuur en studiedagen 2017, FOD Volks- gezondheid, Veiligheid van de voedselketen en Leefmilieu, 26b.
Sharma, D. C. (2015). India still struggles with rural doctor shortages.
The Lancet, 386(10011), 2381–2382.
Sheer, B., & Wong, F. K. Y. (2008). fte development of advanced nursing practice globally. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 40(3), 204–211. [Classic]
Simamora, R. H. (2009). Buku Ajar Pendidikan dalam Keperawatan
[in Indonesian]. EGC, Jakarta.

Singapore Nursing Board. (2016). Advanced practice nurse. http:// www.healthprofessionals.gov.sg/content/hprof/snb/en/leftnav
/advanced_practice_nurse.html
Slocombe, M. (2000). Development of community health services in the Cayman Islands. International NP/APN Conference, San Diego, CA, United States.
Sachverständigenrat zur Begutachtung der Entwicklung im Gesundheitswesen (SVR Gesundheit). (2007, July 9). Kooperation und Verantwortung - Voraussetzungen einer zielorien- tierten Gesundheitsversorgung. http://dipbt.bundestag.de/dip21
/btd/16/063/1606339.pdf
Tannen, A., Feuchtinger, J., Strohbucker, B., & Kocks, A. (2017). State of development of the role of academic nursing staff at German university hospitals in 2015 [in German]. Z.Evid.Fortbild.Qual. Gesundh.wesen (ZEFQ) 120(2017), 39–46.
Teigeler, B. (2015). Mit Master am Patientenbett. Die Schwester Der Pfleger, 53 Jahrg.1/14.
Tracy, M. F., & O’Grady, E. T. (2019): Hamric and Hanson’s advanced practice nursing. An integrative approach (6th ed.). Elsevier.
Tracy, M. F., & Sendelbach, S. (2019): fte clinical nurse specialist. In
M. F. Tracy, E. T. O’Grady (Eds.), Hamric and Hanson’s advanced practice nursing. An integrative approach (6th ed., pp. 343–373). Elsevier.
Tsay, S. L., & Kuo, S. Z. (2008). Nursing care in Taiwan. Section VII: Advanced Nursing Practice (pp. 177–183). Taiwan Department of Health.
Ullmann, P., & Lehwaldt, D. (2013). Hochschulische Masterprogramme im Kontext der modernen Pflegebildung - die nationale Perspektive. (I. Darmann-Finck, & M. Hülsken-Giesler, Hrsg.) http://www
   .bwpat.de/ht2013/ft14/ullmann_lehwaldt_ft14-ht2013.pdf Ullmann, P., ftissen, K., Ullmann, B., Schwerdt, R., Haynert, H.,
Grissom, B., Keogh, J., Lehwaldt, D., Schmitte, H., Merki, D.,
Haider, A. Z., Platt, P., Williams, D., Meier, R., & Holzknecht,
A. (2011). Deutschen Netzwerk Advanced Practice Nursing & Ad- vanced Nursing Practice Positionspapier ‘Die kopernikanische Wende’ Advanced Practice Nursing, Advanced Nursing Practice. DNAPN.
University of Cape Coast School of Nursing and Midwifery. (2020). Academic programs. https://snm.ucc.edu.gh/academic- programmes-school-nursing-midwifery
University of Ghana School of Nursing and Midwifery. (2016). https://nursing.ug.edu.gh/node/55
Van Hecke, A., Bogaert, P., Decoene, E., Dobbels, F., Goossens, E., Goossens, G. A., Verhaeghe, S., & Goffin, T. (In press). A legal framework on advanced practice nursing in Belgium: What do we and don’t we know? Acta Clinica Belgica, 2020.
Van Hecke, A., Goemaes, R., Verhaeghe, S., Beyers, W., Decoene, E., & Beeckman, D. (2019). Leadership in nursing and midwifery: Activities and associated competencies of advanced practice nurses and midwives. Journal of Nursing Management, 27, 1261–1274.
Western Pacific Region Nursing. (2013). Western Pacific region nursing and midwifery databank: Country Samoa. http://www.wpro.who
.int/hrh/about/nursing_midwifery/db_samoa_2013.pdf



Wong, F. K. Y., & Wong, A. K. C. (2020). Advanced practice nurs- ing in Hong Kong and Mainland China. In S. B. Hassmiller &
J. Pulcini (Eds.), Advanced practice nursing leadership: A global perspective (pp. 105–114). Springer Nature.
Wongkpratoom, S., Srisuphan, W., Senaratana, W., Nantachaipan, P., & Sritanyarat, W. (2010). Role development of advanced practice nurses in ftailand. Pacific Rim International Journal of Nursing Research, 14(2), 162–177.
Woo, B. F. Y., Zhou, W., Lim, T. W., Tam, W. S. W. (2019). Reg-
istered nurses’ perceptions towards advanced practice nursing: A nationwide cross-sectional study. Journal of Nursing Management, 00, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1111/jonm.12893
World Health Organization. (2014). Human resources for health: Foun- dation universal health coverage and the post-2015 development agenda. Report on the ftird Global Forum on Human Resources for Health, Geneva, Switzerland.
World Health Organization. (2016). Global strategic directions for strengthening nursing and midwifery 2016–2020.
World Health Organization—Eastern Mediterranean Region (WHO-EMRO). (2001). Fifth meeting of the regional advisory panel on nursing and consultation on advanced practice nursing and nurse pre- scribing: Implications for regulation, nursing education and practice in the Eastern Mediterranean. WHO-EM/NUR/348/E/L. Cairo, Egypt.
World Health Organization—Eastern Mediterranean Regional Of- fice (WHO-EMRO). (2013). Report on the ninth meeting of the Regional Advisory Panel on Nursing and consultation on nursing edu- cation in the Eastern Mediterranean Region. Amman, Jordan.
World Health Organization—Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office (WHO-EMRO). (2018). A regional guide for the development of nursing specialist practice. Cairo, Egypt.
World Health Organization—Western Pacific Region (WHO-WPRO). (2001). Mid-level and nurse practitioners in the Pacific: Models and issues. Manila, Philippines.
Zorgnet Vlaanderen. (2011). Functiedifferentiatie en functieclassifi- catie in de verpleegkundige beroepsbeoefening.

CHAPTER 6
American Academy of Nurse Practitioners. (2010). Cost effectiveness of nurse practitioners.
American Academy of Nurse Practitioners. (2020). Statutory and regu- latory authority for nurse practitioners.
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2020, February). Scope of practice for nurse anesthesia.
American College of Nurse-Midwives. (2016a). Midwives and prescrip- tive authority.
American College of Nurse-Midwives. (2016b). State laws governing the relationship between CNMs and physicians.
APRN Consensus Workgroup. (2016). Consensus Model for APRN reg- ulation: Licensure, accreditation, certification and education.
Brown, S. A., & Grimes, D. E. (1995). A meta-analysis of nurse prac- titioners and nurse midwives in primary care. Nursing Research, 44(6), 332–339. [Classic]

Goolsby, M. (2005). 2004 AANP national nurse practitioner sample survey, part II: Nurse practitioner prescribing. Journal of the Ameri- can Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 17(12), 506–511.
Goolsby, M. (2009). National nurse practitioner survey. American Academy of Nurse Practitioners.
Hudspeth, R. S., & Klein, T. (2019). Understanding nurse practitioner scope of practice: Regulatory, practice, and employment perspec- tives now and for the future. Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, 31(8), 469–473.
Institute of Medicine. (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health.
Klein, T., & Lugo, R. (2018). Evaluating prescribing competence in nurse practitioner fellowship and residency programs. The Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 14(10), e197–e205.
Laurant, M., Reeves, D., Hermens, R., Braspenning, J., Grol, R., & Sibbald, B. (2005, April 18). Substitution of doctors by nurses in primary care. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2. https:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15846614
Lyon, B., & Minarik, P. (2001). Statutory and regulatory issues for clinical nurse practitioner practice. Clinical Nurse Specialist, 15(3), 30–39.
National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists. (2002). Assuring the public’s access to CNS services: Model statutory/regulatory language to regulate CNS practice.
National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists. (2005). NACNS po- sition statement on advanced pharmacology: Practice, curricular and regulatory recommendations.
National Council of State Boards for Nursing. (2008). APRN talking points: Consensus Model for APRN regulation. http://www.aacn
.nche.edu/education-resources/APRNReport.pdf
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2016). APRN maps.
https://www.NCSBN.org/
Office of Technology Assessment. (1986). Nurse practitioners, physi- cian assistants and certified nurse-midwives: A policy analysis (Policy No. OTA-HCS-37). U.S. Government Printing Office. [Classic]
Talley, S., & Richens, S. (2001). Prescribing practices of advanced practice psychiatric nurses: Part I—Demographic, educational and practice characteristics. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 15(5), 205–213.
Towers, J. (1989). American Academy of Nurse Practitioners National Survey. Part II. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practi- tioners, 1(4), 137–145.
Towers, J. (1999a). American Academy of Nurse Practitioners National Survey: Prescribing practices. American Academy of Nurse Practitioners.
Towers, J. (1999b). American Academy of Nurse Practitioners National Survey: Prescribing practices in hospital settings. American Academy of Nurse Practitioners.
United States Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Adminis- tration. (2012). Practitioner’s manual: An informational outline of the Controlled Substances Act. http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov
/pubs/manuals/pract/pract_manual012508.pdf



CHAPTER 7
American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2019). NP fact sheet.
https://www.aanp.org/about/all-about-nps/np-fact-sheet
Bean, M. (2018). APPs in leadership roles: Key opportunities and considerations for hospitals. https://www.beckershospitalreview. com/workforce/apps-in-leadership-roles-key-opportunities-and- considerations-for-hospitals.html
Beresford, L. (2016, July). PAs, NPs  seizing  key  leadership roles in HM groups, health systems. The Hospitalist (7). https://www.the-hospitalist.org/hospitalist/article/121578
    /pas-nps-seizing-key-leadership-roles-hm-groups-health-systems Brassard, A., & Smolenski, M. (2011). Removing barriers to advanced
practice registered nurse care: Hospital privileges. AARP Public Policy
Institute, Insight on the Issues 55.
Buppert, C. (2018). Business practice and legal guide (6th ed.). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Campaign for Action. (2020). https://campaignforaction.org/wp-content
/uploads/2019/03/APRN-Practice-two-pager-1-21-2020.pdf
Cary, A. H. (2017). Credentialing for health care personnel. In
M. Harris (Ed.), Handbook of home health care administration
(6th ed.). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Center for Advancing Provider Practices. (2016, April 21). Utilization of APRNs/PAs [Presentation].
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2020, March 17). Medi- care Telehealth frequently asked questions (FAQs). https://edit.cms
.gov/files/document/medicare-telehealth-frequently-asked-questions- faqs-3170.pdf
Cheung, K. (2011). TJCchanges MS.08.01.01 and MS.08.01.03:“Med-
ical” APRN and PA to be privileged through med staff process. http:// blogs.hcpro.com/credentialing/2011/02tjc-changes-ms-08-01-01 and ms-08-01-03/
Council for Affordable Quality Healthcare, Inc. (2020). CAQH fact sheet. http://www.caqh.org/sites/default/files/solutions/proview/ marketing/caqh_fact_sheet_6.30.15b.pdf?token=30BvmFwt
D’Arrigio, T. (2016, December). Getting the most from advanced practice providers. Hospitalists team up with nurse practitioners and physician assistants. https://acphospitalist.org/archives/2016/12
/advanced-practice-providers.htm
Fauteux, N., Brand, R., Fink, J. L. W., Frelick, M., & Werrlein, D. (2017). fte case for removing barriers to APRN practice. In
M. Ladden, S. Hassmiller, & N. Fauteux (Eds.), Charting nursing’s future. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
HCPro. (2016a). Credentialing/privileging. https://hcmarketplace
.com/subject/credentialing-privileging
HCPro. (2016b). Sample forms available for NP Derm and ER, CNS PMH, ACNP and CNM. http://www.online-crc.com/core-privileges
.cfm
Health Resources and Services Administration. (2014). Credentialing and privileging of health center practitioners [Policy Information Notice 2001-16]. https://www.medpro.com/documents/10502
/359074/Credentialing+and+Privileging.pdf

Health Resources and Services Administration: Fiscal year 2020. (2020).
National practitioner data bank (p. 163). https://www.hrsa.gov
/sites/default/files/hrsa/about/budget/budget-justification-fy2020
    .pdf, https://www.npdb.hrsa.gov/topNavigation/aboutUs.jsp Hendren,  R.  (2011,  February  8).  Nurse  practitioner  elected
medical  staff  president.  HealthLeaders  Media.  http://www
.healthleadersmedia.com/nurse-leaders/nurse-practitioner-elected
-medical-staff-president
Institute of Medicine. (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. National Academies Press.
Mumper, J. (2019). Hospital admitting privileges: Do they matter?
    https://blog.partenrmd.com/blog/hospital-admitting-privileges National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2008). Campaign for
APRN consensus: Model for uniform national advanced practice regis-
tered nurse regulation. http://www.ncsbn.org
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2011). The consensus model for APRN regulation. https://www.ncsbn.org/aprn-compact
.htm
Pelletier, S. J. (2015). Core privileges for AHPs (3rd ed.). HCPro, Inc. fte Joint Commission. (2008). Comprehensive accreditation manuals. fte Joint Commission. (2012). 2012 Update 1. Comprehensive accred-
itation manual for hospitals and comprehensive accreditation manual
for critical access hospitals.
fte Joint Commission Perspectives. (2012). Accepted: Final revisions to telemedicine standards.
fte Joint Commission Resources. (2017, 2020). Emergency manage- ment resources. TJC EM.02.02.13. https://www.jointcommission
.org/emergency_management.aspx
Utilization Review Accreditation Commission. (2011). Provider cre- dentialing standards, version 6.0.
Utilization Review Accreditation Commission. (2016). Credentials verification organization standards.4.0. https://www.urac.org
/resource-center/research-publications/standards-and-measures- at-a-glance/
Van Vleet, A., & Paradise, J. (2015, January 20). Tapping nurse practitioners to meet rising demand for primary care. Kai- ser Family Foundation Issue Brief. http://www.kff.org/medicaid
/issue-brief/tapping-nurse-practitioners-to-meet-rising-demand- for-primary-care/

CHAPTER 8
Alberto, J., & Herth, K. (2009, May). Interprofessional collaboration within faculty roles: Teaching, service and research. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 14(2). American Nurses Association. http:// www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace
/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. (2007). Acute and critical care clinical nurse specialists: Synergy for best practice. W. B. Saunders.
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2020). Scope of nurse anesthesia practice. http://www.aana.com



American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2019). State practice environment. https//www.aanp.org/legislation-regulation/state- legislation/state-practice-environment
American College of Nurse-Midwives. (1997). Collaborative manage- ment in midwifery: Practice for medical, gynecological and obstetrical conditions [Position statement].
American College of Nurse-Midwives. (2011). A brief history of nurse midwives in the U.S. http://www.mymidwife.org
American College of Nurse-Midwives/American Congress of Obstetri- cians and Gynecologists. (2018). Joint statement of practice relations between obstetrician gynecologists and certified nurse-midwives/certified midwives. fte College. http://www.ACOG.org
American Federation of Teachers Healthcare. (2001). The health care workforce in ten states: Education, practice and policy. A report of the state of the healthcare workforce 2001. American Federation of Teachers/American Federation of Labor—Congress of Industrial Organizations.
American Medical Directors Association Ad Hoc Work Group on the Role of the Attending Physician and Advanced Practice Nurse. (2011). Collaborative and supervisory relationships between at- tending physicians and advanced practice nurses in long-term care facilities. Geriatric Nursing, 32(1), 7–17.
American Nurses Association. (1998). Collaboration and independent practice: Ongoing issues for nursing. Nursing Trends and Issues, 3(5), 1–12.
American Nurses Association. (2015). Nursing: Scope and standards of practice (3nd ed.). Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2010b). Nursing’s policy statement: The essence of the profession (3rd ed.). Nursebooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2015). Nursing’s social policy statement.
Nursebooks.org.
APRN Joint Dialogue Group. (2008). APRN Consensus Model. Report. National Council of State Boards of Nursing. https://www.ncsbn
   .org/Consensus_Model_for_APRN_Regulation_July_ 2008.pdf Arevian, M. (2005). fte significance of a collaborative practice model
in delivering care to chronically ill patients: A case study of man-
aging diabetes mellitus in a primary health care center. Journal of Interprofessional Care, 19(5), 444–451.
Baer, E. (1993). Philosophical and historical bases of primary care nursing. In M. Mezey & D. McGivern (Eds.), Nurses, nurse prac- titioners: Evolution to advanced practice (pp. 102–110). Springer. [Classic]
Baggs, J., & Schmitt, M. (1997). Nurses’ and resident physicians’ per- ceptions of the process of collaboration in an MICU. Research in Nursing and Health, 20(1), 71–80.
Bailey, J., & Armer, J. (1998). Registered nurse–physician collaborative practice: Success stories. In T. J. Sullivan (Ed.), Collaboration: A health care imperative (pp. 225–249). McGraw-Hill. [Classic]
Becker, M., & Porth, L. (2011). Primary care physicians: The status in rural Missouri. Missouri Hospital Association. fte Association. http://www.mhanet.com
Benner, P. (1984). From novice to expert. Addison-Wesley. [Classic]

Bigbee, J. L. (1996). History and evolution of advanced nursing prac- tice. In A. B. Hamric, J. A. Spross, & C. M. Hanson (Eds.), Ad- vanced nursing practice: An integrative approach (pp. 3–24). W. B. Saunders. [Classic]
Blais, K. K., Hayes, J. S., Kozier, B., & Erb, G. (2002). Professional nursing practice: Concepts and perspectives. Prentice Hall.
Blumenreich, G. (2007). Another article on the surgeon’s liability for anesthesia negligence. Legal Briefs. AANA Journal, 75(2), 89–93.
Bodenheimer, T. (2008). Coordinating care—A perilous journey through the health care system. Health policy report. New England Journal of Medicine, 358(10), 1064–1071.
Brar, K., Boschma, G., & McCuaig, F. (2010, March 8). fte devel- opment of nurse practitioner preparation beyond the master’s level: What is the debate about? International Journal of Nurs- ing Education Scholarship, 7(9). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
/pubmed/20361861
Brown, J., Bedford, N., & White, S. (1999). Gerontological protocols for nurse practitioners. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Buerhaus, P. (2010). Have nurse practitioners reached a tipping point? Interview of a panel of NP thought leaders. Nursing Economics, 28(5), 346–349.
Carthon, J. M. B., & Sarik, D. A. (2015, May). Federal policies in- fluence access to primary care and nurse practitioner workforce. Journal of Nurse Practitioners, 11(5), 526–530.
Clarin, O. (2007). Strategies to overcome barriers to effective nurse practitioner and physician collaboration. Journal for Nurse Practi- tioners, 3(8), 536–548.
Clark, S. (2016, March). Patient-centered simulations can strengthen collegial relationships. American Nurse Today, 11(3). https://www
.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/advanced
Colon-Emeric, C. S., Lekan, D., Utley-Smith, Q., Ammarell, N., Bailey, D., Corazzini, K., Piven, M. L., & Anderson, R. (2007, September). Barriers to and facilitators of clinical practice guide- line use in nursing homes. Journal of the American Geriatric Society, 55(9), 1404–1409.
Cooper, R. A. (2001). Health care workforce for the twenty-first cen- tury: fte impact of nonphysician clinicians. Annual Review of Medicine, 52, 51–61.
de la Riva, E. E., Haijar, N., Tom, L. S., Phillips, S., Dong, X., & Simon, M. A. (2016, May). Providers’ views on a community
-wide patient navigation program: Implications for dissemination and future implementation. Health Promotion Practitioner, 17(3), 382–390. doi:10.1177/1524839916628865
Devaney, S., Kuehn, A., & Jones, R. (2002). fte Fitzgibbon hospital experience. Missouri Nurse, 14, 29.
Devereux, P. M. (1981). Essential elements of nurse–physician col- laboration. Journal of Nursing Administration, 11(5), 19–23. [Classic]
Donald, F., Mohide, E. A., DiCenso, A., Brazil, K., Stephenson, M., & Akhtar-Danesh, N. (2009). Nurse practitioner and physician col- laboration in long term care homes: Survey results. Canadian Jour- nal on Aging, 28(10), 77–87.



Dorroh, M., & Norton, S. F. (1996). fte certified nurse-midwife. In
A. B. Hamric, J. A. Spross, & C. M. Hanson (Eds.), Advanced nurs- ing practice: An integrative approach (pp. 395–419). W. B. Saunders.
Drenkard, K. (2010, March). Going for the gold: fte value of attain- ing Magnet Recognition. American Nurse Today, 17(3), 390–392. American Nurses Association.
Faut-Callahan, M., & Kremer, M. (1996). fte certified registered nurse anesthetist. In A. B. Hamric, J. A. Spross, & C. M. Han- son (Eds.), Advanced nursing practice: An integrative approach (pp. 421–444). W. B. Saunders.
Fenton, M., & Brykczynski, I. (1993). Qualitative distinctions and similarities in the practice of clinical nurse specialists and nurse practitioners. Journal of Professional Nursing, 9(6), 313–326.
Fischman, J. (2002). Nursing wounds. U.S. News and World Report, 132(21), 54–55.
Friedson, E. (1970). Professional dominance: The social structure of med- ical care. Atherton Press, Inc. [Classic]
Gaguski, M., & Begyn, P. (2009, July). A unique model of shared gov- ernance. Oncology Nursing Forum, 36(4), 385–388.
Gardner, D. (2010, July/August). Expanding scope of practice: Inter-professional collaboration or conflict? Nursing Economics, 28(4), 264–266.
Glasgow, M. E., Dunphy, L., & Mainous, R. (2010, November/ December). Innovative nursing educational curriculum for the 21st century. Nursing Education Perspectives, 31(6), 355–357.
Goodman, S. (2007). Piercing the veil: fte marginalization of mid- wives in the United States. Social Science and Medicine, 65(3), 610–621.
Haney, C. (2010, June). New care delivery models in health system reform: Opportunities for nurses & their patients. ANA Issue Brief, American Nurses Association, 1–7.
Hanna, D. (1996). Primary care nurse practitioner. In A. B. Hamric,
J. A. Spross, & C. M. Hanson (Eds.), Advanced nursing practice: An integrative approach (pp. 337–355). W. B. Saunders. [Classic]
Hanson, C., & Spross, J. (1996). Collaboration. In A. B. Hamric,
J. A. Spross, & C. M. Hanson (Eds.), Advanced nursing practice: An integrative approach (pp. 229–248). W. B. Saunders. [Classic]
Hojat, M., Gonnella, J. S., Nasca, T. J., Fields, S. K., & Cicchetti,
A. (2003). Comparisons of American, Israeli, Italian and Mex- ican physicians and nurses on the total and factor scores of the Jefferson scale of attitudes toward physician-nurse collaborative relationships. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 40(4), 427–435.
Hoole, A., Pickard, C., Ouimette, R., Lohr, J., & Powell, W. (1999). Patient care guidelines for nurse practitioners (5th ed.). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Hughes, J. (2011, May 11). New health care model emphasizes team work. http://www.clinicaladvisor.com
Institute of Medicine. (2004). Keeping patients safe: Transforming the work environment of nurses. National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. National Academies Press.

Institute of Medicine. (2015). Measuring the impact of interprofessional educational on collaborative practice and patient outcomes (3rd ed.). fte National Academic Press (Google Scholar).
Jehn, K., Northcraft, G., & Neale, M. (1999). Why differences make a difference: A field study of diversity, conflict and performance in workgroups. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(4), 741–763.
Jones, R. A. P. (1994). Nurse–physician collaboration: A descriptive study. Holistic Nursing Practice, 8(3), 38–53.
Jones, T., & Fitzpatrick, J. (2009). CRNA–physician collaboration in anesthesia. AANA Journal, 77(6), 431–436.
Kaiser Family Foundation. (2015, July 24). Nurse practitioner scope of practice laws. http://www.kff.org/other/state-indicator/
Kaplow, R. (2007). Synergy model: Guiding the practice of the CNS in acute and critical care. In American Association of Critical-Care Nurses, Acute and critical care-clinical nurse specialists: Synergy for best practice. W. B. Saunders.
Kappas-Larson, P. (2008). fte Evercare story: Reshaping the health care model, revolutionizing long-term care. Journal for Nurse Prac- titioners, 4(2), 132–136.
Keely, J. I. (2002). Pharmacist scope of practice. Annals of Internal Medicine, 136, 79–85.
Kim, J., Ea, E., Parish, A. L., & Levin, R. (2016, May). A nurse practitioner-led heart failure education program for certified nurs- ing assistants in a long-term care facility. Annals of Long-Term Care, 24(5), 27–34.
King, K. B., Parrinello, K. M., & Baggs, J. G. (1996). Collabora- tion and advanced practice nursing. In L. Hickey, R. Oimette, &
S. Venegoni (Eds.), Advanced practice nursing: Changing roles and clinical applications (pp. 146–162). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Kinlein, L. (1977). Independent nursing practice with clients.
J. B. Lippincott. [Classic]
Koch, B. E. (2015, March). Surgeon-nurse anesthetist collaboration advanced surgery between 1889 and 1950. Anesthesia & Analgesia, 120(3), 653–662.
Koerner, J., & Karpiuk, K. (1994). Implementing differentiated nursing practice: Transformation by design. Aspen.
Kubota, S. (2011). Missouri nurses attend summit for improved health- care. http://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.missourinurses.org/resource
/resmgr/imported/MoAC-WaveIII AppFinal8-10-11.pdf
Kuehn, A. F. (1998). Collaborative health professional educa- tion: An interdisciplinary mandate for the third millennium. In T. J. Sullivan (Ed.), Collaboration: A health care imperative (pp. 419–465). McGraw-Hill.
Kuehn, A. F., & Porter, R. (1993). Study design. In T. J. Sullivan (Ed.), Missouri nursing 2000: Creating a positive future. A report of the Missouri Nursing 2000 Study Group (pp. 42–54). Missouri Nurses Association.
Landro, L. (2008, April 2). Making room for “Dr. Nurse.” In The Informed Patient. Missouri Nurses Association.
Loskutova, N. Y., Tsai, A. G., Fisher, E. B., LaCruz, D. M., Cherrington, A. L., Harrington, M. L., Turner, T. J., & Pace, W. D.



(2016, Jan/Feb). Patient navigators connecting patients to com- munity resources to improve diabetes outcomes. Journal of Ameri- can Board of Family Medicine, 78–89.
Lott, J. W., Polak, J. D., Kenyon, T. B., & Kenner, C. A. (1996). Acute care nurse practitioner. In A. B. Hamric, J. A. Spross, &
C. M. Hanson (Eds.), Advanced nursing practice: An integrative ap- proach (pp. 351–373). W. B. Saunders. [Classic]
Maier, C. B., & Aiken, L. H. (2016). Expanding clinical roles for nurses to realign the global health workforce with population needs: A commentary. Israel Journal of Health Policy Research, 5, 21. doi:10.1186/s13584-016-0079-2
Markowitz, G., & Rosner, D. (1979). Doctors in crisis: Medical education and medical reform during the progressive era, 1895–1915. In S. Reverby & D. Rosner (Eds.), Health care in America (pp. 185–205). Temple University. [Classic]
Marshall, B. (2016). fte role of federal and state government in ad- vanced practice nursing. Journal of Pregnancy and Child Health, 3(2), 1.
Martinen, M., & Freundl, M. (2004). Managing congestive heart fail- ure in long-term care. Journal of Gerontological Nursing, 30, 5–12.
Maylone, M., Ranieri, L., Griffin, M., McNulty, R., & Fitzpatrick, J. (2011, January). Collaboration and autonomy: Perceptions among nurse practitioners. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Prac- titioners, 23(1), 51–57.
McCarter, S. P., Tariman, J. D., Spawn, N., Mehmeti, E., Bishop- Royse, J., Garcia, I., Hartle, L., & Szubski, K. (2016, May 18). Barriers and promoters to participation in the era of shared treat- ment decision-making. Western Journal of Nursing Research, 38(10), 1282–1297. (Epub)
McGrail, K., Morse, D., Glessner, T., & Gardner, K. (2008). “What is found there”: Qualitative analysis of physician-nurse collaboration stories. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 24(2), 198–204.
Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary (10th ed.). (1994).
Messmer, P. (2008, July). Enhancing nurse–physician collaboration us- ing pediatric simulation. Journal of Continuing Education in Nurs- ing, 39(7), 319–327.
Miller, K. I., & Apker, J. (2002). On the front lines of managed care: Professional changes and communicative dilemmas of hospital nurses. Nursing Outlook, 50(4), 154–159.
Missouri Nurses Association. (2011, June 28). Missouri teamwork sum- mit 2011: Summary of outcomes. http://www.missourinurses.org
National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists. (2020). Current de- mographics. http://nacns.org
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2020). Consensus model for APRN practice. http://ncsbn.org
National Joint Practice Commission. (1981). Guidelines for establishing joint or collaborative practice in hospitals. Neely. [Classic]
National League for Nursing. (1997). Commission on a workforce for a restructured health care system. Part 2. NLN.
Newhouse, R., Stanik-Hutt, J., White, K., Johantgen, M., Bass, E., Zangara, G., & Weiner, J. (2011, September–October). Advanced practice nurse outcomes 1990–2008: A systematic review. Nursing

Economics, 29(5), 230–250. http://www.nursingeconomics.net/ ce/2013/article3001021.pdf
Newman, D. (1996). Program practice management for the advanced practice nurse. In A. B. Hamric, J. A. Spross, & C. M. Hanson (Eds.). Advanced nursing practice: An integrative approach (pp. 545–568).
W. B. Saunders. [Classic]
Norsen, L., Opladen, J., & Quinn, J. (1995). Practice model: Col- laborative practice. Critical Care Nursing Clinics of North America, 7(1), 43–52.
O’Brien, J., Martin, D., Heyworth, J., & Meyer, N. (2009). A phe- nomenological perspective on advanced practice nurse–physician collaboration within an interdisciplinary healthcare team. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 21, 444–453.
O’Neil, E. H., & Pew Health Professions Commission. (1998). Recre- ating health professional practice for a new century. Fourth report. Pew Health Professions Commission.
Orem, D. (1995). Nursing: Concepts of practice. Mosby. [Classic]
Paradise, J., Dark, C., & Bitler, N. (2011, March). Improving access to adult primary care in Medicaid: Exploring the potential role of nurse practitioners and physician assistants [Issue paper]. Kaiser Commis- sion on Medicaid and the Uninsured. http://www.kff.org
Parse, R. R. (2015). Interdisciplinary and interprofessional: What are the differences? Nursing Science Quarterly, 28(1), 5–6.
Partin, B. (2009). APRN/physician collaboration: A call to action.
Nurse Practitioner, 34(11), 6.
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. (2010). H.R.3590. 111th Congress. https://www.congress.gov/bill/111th-congress
/house-bill/3590
Pearson, L. (2019). A national overview of nurse practitioner legislation and healthcare issues. In The Pearson Report. http://nursing.jbpub
    .com/pearsonreport/Login.aspx?ref=/pearsonreport/default.aspx Pearson, P., & Jones, K. (1994). fte primary health care non-team?
British Medical Journal, 309(6966), 1387–1388.
Peters, T., & Waterman, R. (1982). In search of excellence. Warner Books. [Classic]
Peterson, Mary. (2017). Barriers to practice and the impact on health care: A nurse practitioner focus. Journal of the Advanced Practitioner in Oncology, 8(1), 74–81.
Phillippi, J. C., & Barger, M. K. (2015). Midwives as primary care providers for women. Journal of Midwifery & Women’s Health, 60, 250–257. doi:10.111/jmwh.12295
Phillips, R. L., Green, L. A., Fryer, G. E., & Dovey, S. M. (2001). Trumping professional roles: Collaboration of nurse practitioners and physicians for a better U.S. health care system. American Fam- ily Physician, 64(8), 1325.
Phillips, S. J. (2016, January). 28th annual legislative update: Ad- vancements continue for APRN practice. Nurse Practitioner, 41(1), 21–48.
Phillips, S. J. (2020). 32nd annual legislative update. Nurse Practi- tioner, 45(1), 28–55.
Plant, R. (1987). Managing change and making it stick. Fontana. [Classic]



Porter-O’Grady, T. (1992). Implementing shared governance. Mosby. Reverby, S. (1979). fte search for the hospital yardstick. In
S. Reverby & D. Rosner (Eds.), Health care in America. Temple
University. [Classic]
Reverby, S. (1987). Ordered to care: The dilemma of American nursing, 1850–1945. Cambridge University. [Classic]
Rice, K., Zwarenstein, M., Conn, L., Kenaszchuk, C., Russell, A., & Reeves, S. (2010). An intervention to improve interprofessional collaboration and communications: A comparative qualitative study. Journal of Interprofessional Care, 24(4), 350–361.
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. (12/4/2015). Joint statement on the Institute of Medicine’s progress report on the future of nursing.
Roberts, M. M. (1959). American nursing. Macmillan. [Classic] Rogers, M. (1972). Nursing: To be or not to be. Nursing Outlook,
20(1), 42–46.
Rosenstein, A. H. (2002). Nurse–physician relationships: Impact on nurse satisfaction and retention. American Journal of Nursing, 102(6), 26–34.
Russell, E. S. (2013, October 18). Patient navigators—Who we are and what we do [Weblog post]. http://patientnavigator.com
/blog/2013/10/18
Sauter, T. S., Hautz, W. E., Hostettler. S., Brodmann-Maeder, M., Martinolli, L., Lehmann, B., Exadaktylos, A. K., & Haider, D. G. (2016, August 2). Interprofessional and interdisciplinary simulation-based training leads to safe sedation procedures in the emergency department. Scandinavian Journal of Trauma, Resuscita- tion, and Emergency Medicine, 24, 97. https://www.biomedcentral
.com/search?query=Simulation-based+training&searchType= publisherSearch
Schaal, A., Skalia, K., Mulrooney, T., Stearns, D., & Smith, E. (2008). Building a collaboration of hematology-oncology advanced prac- tice nurses. Part II: Outcomes. Oncology Nursing Forum, 35(6), 875–878.
Schram, A. P. (2010, February). Medical home and the nurse practi- tioner: A policy analysis. The Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 6(2), 132–139.
Schuiling, K. D., & Slager, J. (2000). Scope of practice: Freedom within limits. Journal of Midwifery & Women’s Health, 45(6), 465–471.
Senge, P. (1994). The fifth discipline. Currency & Doubleday. [Classic] Shah, M. A. (2002). Make way for a new ACNM/ACOG joint state- ment. The president’s pen. http://www.midwife.org/prof/display
.cm/?id=274
Skinner, J., & Foureur, M. (2010). Consultation, referral and col- laboration between midwives and obstetricians: Lessons from New Zealand. Journal of Midwifery and Women’s Health, 55(1), 28–37.
Sorrel, A. (2009, June 29). AMA meeting: Physician supervision of nurses sought in all practice agreements. http://amednews.com
Spitrey, J. (2016, June 10). APRNs gaining respect but resistance still remains. http://exclusive.multibriefs.com/content/aprns
Stanley, J. (2005). Advanced practice nursing (2nd ed.). F.A. Davis.

Starfield, B. (1992a). Primary care: Concept, evaluation and policy.
Oxford University Press.
Starfield, B. (1992b). fte future of primary care in a managed care era.
International Journal of Health Science, 27(4), 687–696.
Sullivan, T. J. (1998). Concept analysis of collaboration: Part 1. In T. J. Sullivan (Ed.), Collaboration: A health care imperative (pp. 3–42). McGraw-Hill.
Sullivan, T. J., Morgan, S., Heimerichs, S., & Scott, J. (1998). When collaboration is legislatively mandated. In T. J. Sullivan (Ed.), Col- laboration: A health care imperative (pp. 325–357). McGraw-Hill.
Swartwout, K., Murphy, M. P., Dreher, M. C., Hehal, R., Haines, A., Ryan, M., Ryan, N., & Saba, M. (2014, March/April). Advanced practice nursing students in the patient-centered medical home: Preparing for a new reality. Journal of Professional Nursing, 30(2), 139–148.
ftomas, E., Sexton, J. B., & Helmreich, R. (2003). Discrepant atti- tudes about teamwork among critical care nurses and physicians. Critical Care Medicine, 31(3), 956–959.
Toffler, A. (1970). Future shock. Random House. [Classic]
Way, D., Jones, L., Baskerville, B., & Busing, N. (2001). Primary health care services provided by nurse practitioners and family phy- sicians in shared practice. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 165(9), 1210–1214.
Webber, P. (2008). fte doctor of nursing practice degree and research: Are we making an epistemological mistake? Journal of Nursing Ed- ucation, 47(10), 466–472.
Workman, L. (1986). No free lunches. Missouri Nurse, 55(5), 16.
Zwarenstein, M., & Bryant, W. (2000). Interventions to promote collaboration between nurses and doctors. Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews (2), CD000072.

CHAPTER 9
Aiken, L. H., & Sloane, D. M. (2020). Nurses matter: More evi- dence. BMJ Quality & Safety, 29, 1–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136
/bmjqs-2019-009732
American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2015). Quality of nurse prac- titioner    practice.   https://www.aanp.org/advocacy/advocacy-resource
   /position-statements/quality-of-nurse-practitioner-practice American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2019, January 28).
Nurse practitioner role grows to more than 270,000. https://www
.aanp.org/news-feed/nurse-practitioner-role-continues-to-grow- to-meet-primary-care-provider-shortages-and-patient-demands
American Association of Nurse Practitioners (2020, February). NP fact sheet. https://www.aanp.org/about/all-about-nps/np-fact-sheet
American Nurses Association. (2017, December 15). Medicaid cov- erage of advanced practice nursing. https://www.nursingworld.org
/practice-policy/aprn/medicaid-coverage-of-advanced-practice- nursing/
Anthem, Inc. (2018). Credentialing program summary 2018 v2. https:// www.anthem.com/docs/inline/P-ALL-CRED-00001.pdf
APRN Consensus Workgroup and the National Council of State Boards of Nursing APRN Advisory Committee. (2008, July 7).



Consensus model for APRN regulation: Licensure, accreditation, certi- fication and education. https://www.ncsbn.org/Consensus_Model_ for_APRN_Regulation_July_2008.pdf. [Classic]
Bauchner H. (2019, February 13). Rationing of health care in the United States: An inevitable consequence of increasing health care costs. JAMA, 321(8), 751–752. https://jamanetwork.com
/journals/jama/article-abstract/2725150
Brown, L. A., & Dolan, C. (2016, February). Employment contract- ing basics for the nurse practitioner. JNP: The Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 12(2), e45–e51. https://www.npjournal.org/article
/S1555-4155(15)01123-X/fulltext?mobileUi=0
Buerhaus, P. I., DesRoches, C. M., Dittus, R., & Donelan, K. (2015, March–April). Practice characteristics of primary care nurse practi- tioners and physicians. Nursing Outlook, 63(2), 144–153.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2020, April 10). Occupational outlook hand- book. https://www.bls.gov/ooh/healthcare/registered-nurses.htm
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2019, November 20). Quality programs. https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality- Initiatives-Patient-Assessment-Instruments/MMS/Quality- Programs
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2019, December 20).
Direct contracting model options. https://innovation.cms.gov
/innovation-models/direct-contracting-model-options
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2020, January 6). Hospital-acquired condition (HAC) reduction program. https:// www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment- Instruments/Value-Based-Programs/HAC/Hospital-Acquired- Conditions
Chiu, A. S., Arnold, B. N., Hoag, J. R., Herrin, J., Kim, C. H., Salazar,
M. C., Monsalve, M. F., Jean, R. A., Blasberg, J. D., Detterbeck,
F. C., Gross, C. P., & Boffa, D. J. (2019, August). Quality ver- sus quantity: fte potential impact of public reporting of hospi- tal safety for complex cancer surgery. Annals of Surgery, 270(2), 281–287. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29697446
Cho, E., Lee, N-J., Kim, E-Y., Kim, S., Lee, K., Park, K-O., & Sung,
Y. H. (2016). Nurse staffing level and overtime associated with pa- tient safety, quality of care, and care left undone in hospitals: A cross-sectional study. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 60, 263–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2016.05.009
Congressional Research Service. (2020, April 14). U.S. health care cov- erage and spending. https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/IF10830.pdf
Costanza, D. (2020). 5 Considerations for success with risk-based contracting. https://www.coniferhealth.com/knowledge-center/5-considerations- for-success-with-risk-based-contracting?cookie-state-change= 1589512451381
Crosby, P. B. (1979). Quality is free (p. 20). New American Library. [Classic]
Davis, S. (2017, May 11). Nurse as leader: Is it time to change our strategy? The Huffington Post. https://www.huffpost.com/entry
/nurse-as-system-leader_b_9887156
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Medi- care and Medicaid Services. (2020, January 6). The hospital

value-based   purchasing   (VBP)   program. https://www.cms.gov
/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment-Instruments
    /Value-Based-Programs/HVBP/Hospital-Value-Based-Purchasing Department  of  Veterans  Affairs  Veterans  Health Administration.
(2017, September 13). VHA directive1350: Advanced prac-
tice registered nurse full practice authority. file:///C:/Users/Acer/ Downloads/1350_D_2017-09-13.pdf
Fuse Brown, E. C., & King, J. S. (2019). ERISA as a barrier for state health care transparency efforts. In C. Shachar, I. G. Cohen, H. F. Lynch, & B. J. Evans (Eds.), Transparency in health and health care (UC Hastings Research Paper No. 334). Cambridge University Press. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3214173
Guinan, M. (2020, January 31). CMS plans to combine quality compare tools. https://essentialhospitals.org/policy/cms-plans-combine- quality-compare-tools/
Jansson, M. M., Syrjälä, H. P., & Ala-Kokko, T. I. (2019). Association of nurse staffing and nursing workload with ventilator-associated pneumonia and mortality: A prospective, single-center cohort study. Journal of Hospital Infection, 101(3), 257–263. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.jhin.2018.12.001
Johnson, J. (2017). Quality improvement. In G. Sherwood &
J. Barnsteiner (Eds.). Quality and safety in nursing: A competency ap- proach to improving outcomes (2nd ed., p. 125). John Wiley & Sons.
Johnson & Johnson Poll. (2002). 3 of 4 Americans never heard of NPs.
Advance for Nurse Practitioners. 10(7), 14. [Classic]
Kongstvedt, P. R. 2019. Health insurance and managed care: What they are and how they work (5th ed.). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Lowes, R. (2016, May 25). VA plan for independent advanced practice RNs riles physicians. Medscape Medical News. http://www.medscape
.com/viewarticle/863848
Mayer, A. (2019, April). Viewpoint. Emergency Medicine News, 41(4), 2–3. https://journals.lww.com/em-news/Fulltext/2019/04000/View point__AAEM_Opposes_NP_and_PA_Independent.20
.aspx?fbclid=IwAR2Yy2vY_n6rX6hZpoIQSJNLat_EkoZY- btYItnvnECg0i-Ae1KT19opf2M
McDonough, J. E. (2020, March 11). Lost in the ACA: Bit parts in a landmark law. Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law. https:// read.dukeupress.edu/jhppl/article/doi/10.1215/03616878- 8255469/160612/Lost-in-the-ACA-Bit-Parts-in-a-Landmark- Law
MedPAC Staff. (2019, February 15). Improving Medicare’s payment policies for advanced practice registered nurses and physician assistants. http:// www.medpac.gov/-blog-/the-commission-recommends-aprns- and-pas-bill-medicare-directly-/2019/02/15/improving- medicare’s-payment-policies-for-aprns-and-pas
Namburi, N., & Tadi, P. (2020 April 5). Managed care economics.
StatPearls Publishing. Retrieved May 13, 2020, from https://www
.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK556053/
National Healthcare Safety Network. (2019, January 16). About NHSN. https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/about-nhsn/index.html
National Quality Forum. (2007). Tracking NQF-endorsed consensus standards for nursing-sensitive care: A 15-month study. file:///C:/



Users/Acer/Downloads/Nursing%20Sensitive_full%20(1).pdf. [Classic]
National Quality Forum. (2020a). NQF’s mission, vision, and values. http://www.qualityforum.org/about_nqf/mission_and_vision/ National Quality Forum. (2020b). 2019 mission highlights. file:///C:/
Users/Acer/Downloads/2019_nqf_mission_highlights.pdf
National Quality Forum. (2020c). NQF’s board of directors. http:// www.qualityforum.org/Board_of_Directors.aspx
PCPI Foundation. (2019, April 6). Measurement science. https://www
.thepcpi.org/page/Measurement-Science
Pinkovskiy, M. L. (2020, March 20). fte impact of the managed care backlash on health care spending. The RAND Journal of Economics, 51(1), 59–108. https://doi.org/10.1111/1756-2171.12306
Press Ganey. (2019). Turn nursing quality insights into improved pa- tient experiences. https://www.pressganey.com/docs/default-source
/default-document-library/clinicalexcellence_ndnqi_solution- summary.pdf?sfvrsn=0
Reinhart, R. J. (2020, January 6). Nurses continue to rate highest in hon- esty, ethics. https://news.gallup.com/poll/274673/nurses-continue- rate-highest-honesty-ethics.aspx
Sensmeier, J., Androwich, I. M., Baernholdt, M., Carroll, W. M., Fields, W., Fong, V., Murphy, J., Omery, A., & Rajwany, N. (2020, March 11). Demonstrating the value of nursing care through use of a unique nurse identifier (UNI). Online Journal of Nursing In- formatics. https://www.himss.org/resources/demonstrating-value- nursing-care-through-use-unique-nurse-identifier
Smigorowsky, M. J., Sebastianski, M., Mcmurtry, M. S., Tsuyuki, R. T., & Norris, C. M. (2020). Outcomes of nurse practitioner-led care in patients with cardiovascular disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 76, 81–95. https:// doi.org/10.1111/jan.14229
Stahlke, S., Rawson, K., & Pituskin, E. (2017). Patient perspectives on nurse practitioner care in oncology in Canada. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 49, 487–494. https://sigmapubs.onlinelibrary.wiley
.com/doi/abs/10.1111/jnu.12313
Swan, M., Ferguson, S., Chang, A., Larson, E., & Smaldone, A. (2015, August 3). Quality of primary care by advanced practice nurses: A systematic review. International Journal for Quality in Health Care Advance Access. https://academic.oup.com/intqhc
/article/27/5/396/2357352
Twin, A. (2019, September 5). The 4 Ps. https://www.investopedia
.com/terms/f/four-ps.asp
TXCIN. (2019, February 21). The physician quality reporting system (PQRS): What is it and where did it go? http://www.insight-txcin
.org/post/the-physician-quality-reporting-system-pqrs-what-is-it- and-where-did-it-go
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019, September 4). Occupational outlook handbook. https://www.bls.gov/ooh/healthcare/registered- nurses.htm#tab-3
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2020). What is hos- pital compare? https://www.medicare.gov/hospitalcompare/About
/What-Is-HOS.html

Zolot, J. (2018, August). Higher than optimal nurse workloads increase the odds of patient mortality. AJN The American Journal of Nursing, 118(8), 17. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30048275/

CHAPTER 10
Abood, S. (2007, January 31). Influencing health care in the legislative arena. OJIN: The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 12(1), Man- uscript 2. [Classic]
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2015). 2014 National health- care quality and disparities report. http://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default
    /files/wysiwyg/research/findings/nhqrdr/nhqdr14/2014nhqdr.pdf Aiken, L. H. (2011). Nurses for the future. New England Journal of
Medicine, 364, 196–198. http://nejm.org
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (1996). The essentials of master’s education for advanced practice nursing. http://www.aacn
.nche.edu/Education/pdf/MasEssentials96.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2004). AACN position statement on the practice doctorate in nursing.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2006). The essentials of doctoral education for advanced nursing practice.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2011). The essentials of master’s education in nursing.
American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2016). State practice environment.
American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2015, January 21). 2015 nurse practitioner ranks surge to 205,000, nearly doubling over past decade. http://www.aanp.org/press-room/press-releases/161-press- room/2014-press-releases/1675-2015-nurse-practitioner-ranks- surge-to-205-000-nearly-doubling-over-past-decade
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. (2015). Health in- surance coverage and the Affordable Care Act. http://aspe.hhs.gov
/sites/default/files/pdf/111826/ACA%20health%20insurance%20 coverage%20brief%2009212015.pdf
Carnegie, E., & Kiger, A. (2009). Being and doing politics:   An outdated model or 21st century reality? Journal of Ad- vanced Nursing, 65(9), 1976–1984. https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1365-2648.2009.05084.x
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. (2016). https://www.cms
.gov/
Cramer, M. E. (2002, May). Factors influencing organized political par- ticipation in nursing. Policy, Politics, & Nursing Practice, 3(2), 97–107.
Cella, A., & King-Jensen, M. (2011). Editorial: Join in to make change. Journal of the New York State Nurses Association, 42(1 & 2).
Cimiotti, J., Li, Y., Sloane, D., Barnes, H., Brom, H., & Aiken, L. (2019). Regulation of the nurse practitioner workforce: Implica- tions for care across settings. Journal of Nursing Regulation, 10, 31–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2155-8256(19)30113-9
Collins, S. R., Bhupal, H. K., & Doty, M. M. (2019, February). Health insurance coverage eight years after the ACA: Fewer uninsured Amer- icans and shorter coverage gaps, but more underinsured. Common- wealth Fund. https://doi.org/10.26099/penv-q932



Dollinger, M. L. (2000). Professional association: Ethics, duty, and power. Journal of the New York State Nurses Association, 31(2), 28–30.
Eibner, C. E., Hussey, P. S., Ridgely, M. S., & McGlynn, E. A. (2009). Controlling health care spending in Massachusetts: An analysis of op- tions. http://www.rand.org/pubs/technical_reports/2009/RAND_ TR733.pdf [Classic]
Emerson, A. M., & Kelly, P. J. (2016). Translate nursing values into community action. Public Health Nursing, 33, 275–276. https:// doi.org/10.1111/phn.12280
Fairman, J. S., Rowe, M. D., Hassmiller, D., & Shalala, D. E. (2011). Broadening the scope of nursing practice. New England Journal of Medicine, 364, 193–196.
Federal Trade Commission. (2014). Competition and regulation of advanced practice nurses. http://www.aacn.nche.edu/government- affairs/APRN-Policy-Paper.pdf
Federal Trade Commission. (2015). FTC staff guidance on active su- pervision of state regulatory boards controlled by market participants. http://www.ftc.gov/system/files/attachments/competition-policy- guidance/active_supervision_of_state_boards.pdf
Fotsch, R. (2016). What’s in a name? Legislative challenges with APRN title change. Journal of Nursing Regulation, 6(4), 73–74.
Harrington, C., & Estes, C. L. (2008). Health policy: Crisis and reform in the U.S. health care delivery system (5th ed.). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Henderson, V. (1966). The nature of nursing: A definition and its impli- cations for practice, research, and education. Macmillan.
Institute of Medicine. (1978). A manpower policy for primary health care: Report of a study. National Academies Press. https://doi.org
/10.17226/9932
Institute of Medicine. (1993). Access to health care in America com- mittee on monitoring access to personal health care services. National Academies Press. http://www.nap.edu/catalog/2009.html
Institute of Medicine. (1996). Primary care: America’s health in a new era. National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/5152
Institute of Medicine. (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2015). Future directions of credentialing research in nursing: Workshop summary. National Academies Press.
Kennedy, E. M. (1985). Foreword. In J. J. Mason & S. W. Talbot, Po- litical action handbook for nurses (p. xxi). Addison-Wesley. [Classic]
Lachman, V. D., Swanson, E. O., & Windland-Brown, J. (2015). fte new ‘code of ethics for nurses with interpretive statements’ (2015): Practical clinical application, part II. MEDSURG Nursing, 24(5), 363–366, 368.
Mason, D. J, Leavitt, J. K., & Chaffee, M. W. (2012). Policy & politics in nursing and health care. Elsevier Saunders.
Mason, D. J., & Talbot, S. W. (1985). Political action handbook for nurses. Addison-Wesley. [Classic]
National Association of Community Health Centers. (2019). Fact Sheet. Retrieved from https://www.ruralcenter.org/resource-library
/national-association-of-community-health-centers-nachc-2019- fact-sheet on 9/27/2021.

National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2008, July 7). Con- sensus model for APRN regulation: Licensure, accreditation, certi- fication & education. http://www.ncsbn.org/Consensus_Model
_Report.pdf
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2016). A changing en- vironment: 2016 NCSBN environmental scan. Journal of Nursing Regulation, 6(4).
National Organization of Nurse Practitioner Faculties. (2006). Do- mains and core competencies of nurse practitioner practice.
National Organization of Nurse Practitioner Faculties. (2012). Nurse practitioner core competencies.
Nurse Practitioner Roundtable. (2010, November). Nurse practitioner perspective on health care payment.
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. (2015). Health insurance coverage and the Affordable Care Act. https:// aspe.hhs.gov/pdf-report/health-insurance-coverage-and-afford- able-care-act-september-2015
111th Congress of the United States of America. (2010). The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. http://www.ncsl.org/documents
/health/ppaca-consolidated.pdf
Pear, R. (2015). U.S. targets four states in effort to enroll the unin- sured.  The  New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/23
/us/politics/us-targets-four-states-in-effort-to-enroll-the-uninsured
.html?_r=0
Pericak, A. (2011). Increased autonomy for nurse practitioners as a solution to the physician shortage. Journal of the New York State Nurses Association, 42(1 & 2), 4–7. http://www.nysna.org/sites
/default/files/attach/ajax/2014/03/vol42.pdf
Perloff, J., DesRoches, C. M., & Buerhaus, P. (2015, December 27). Comparing the cost of care provided to Medicare beneficiaries as- signed to primary care nurse practitioners and physicians. Health Services Research. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6773.12425
Piren, K., & Reinhard, S. C. (2009). Advocacy and the advanced prac- tice nurse. In L. A. Joel (Ed.), Advanced practice nursing: Essentials for role development (2nd ed., pp. 261–276) F.A. Davis.
Pohl, J., Barksdale, D., & Werner, K. (2015, July 1). Primary care workforce: The need to lower barriers for nurse practitioners and physicians. http://healthaffairs.org/blog/2015/07/01/primary-care- workforce-the-need-to-lower-barriers-for-nurse-practitioners-and- physicians/
Stanley, J. M. (2012). Impact of new regulatory standards on advanced practice registered nursing: fte APRN consensus model and LACE. Nursing Clinics of North America, 47, 241–250. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.cnur.2012.02.001
Stone, D. (1997). Policy paradox: The art of political decision making.
e.W. Norton & Company.
Tomey, A. M., & Alligood, M. R. (1998). Nursing theorists and their work (p. 102). Mosby. [Classic]
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2011). Healthy Peo- ple 2020 framework. The vision, mission, and goals of Healthy People 2020. Overarching goals. http://healthypeople.gov/2020/Consortium
/HP2020Framework.pdf



Warner, J. R. (2003). A phenomenological approach to political com- petence: Stories of nurse activists. Policy Politics Nursing Practice, 4(2), 135–143.

CHAPTER 11
Austin, J. M., & Pronovost, P. J. (2015). “Never events” and the quest to reduce preventable harm. Joint Commission Journal on Quality & Patient Safety, 41(6), 279–288.
Cleverley, W. O., Song, P. H., & Cleverly, J. O. (2018). Essentials of health care finance (8th ed.). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Finkler, S. A., Jones, C. B., & Kovner, C. T. (2019). Financial manage- ment for nurse managers and executives (5th ed.). Elsevier/Saunders.
Gapenski, L. C. (2016). Healthcare finance: An introduction to account- ing and financial management (6th ed.). Health Administration Press. [Classic]
Penner, S. J. (2017). Economics and financial management for nurses and nurse leaders (3rd ed.). Springer.
Rimler, S. B., Gale, B. D., & Reede, D. L. (2015). Diagnosis-related groups and hospital inpatient federal reimbursement. Radiograph- ics, 35(6), 1825–1834.

CHAPTER 12
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (1996). The essentials of mas- ter’s education for advanced practice nursing. Author.
American Nurses Association. (2015). Guide to nursing’s social policy statement: Understanding the profession from social contract to social covenant. Author.
Andel, C., Davidow, S. L., Hollander, M., & Moreno, D. A. (2012). fte economics of health care quality and medical errors. Journal of Healthcare Finance, 39(1), 39–50.
Arcongelo, V., Fitzgerald, M., Carroll, D., & Plumb, J. (1996). Col- laborative care between nurse practitioners and primary care physi- cians. Primary Care, 23(1), 103–113. [Classic]
Bleich, M. R. (2011). IOM report. fte future of nursing: leading change, advancing health: Milestones and challenges in expanding nursing science. Research in Nursing and Health, 34(3), 169–170. https://doi.org/10.1002/nur.20433
Chen, L. L. (2020, June). Standardized adult-gerontology acute care nurse practitioner point-of-care ultrasound training: A new per- spective in the age of a pandemic. Journal of the American Associa- tion of Nurse Practitioners, 32(6), 416–418.
Cimiotti, J. P., Li, Y., Sloane, D. M., Barnes, H., Brom, H. M., & Aiken, L. H. (2019). Regulation of the nurse practitioner work- force: Implications for care across settings. Journal of Nursing Reg- ulation, 10(2), 31–37.
Cronenwett, L., & Dzau, V. (2010). Co chairs’ summary of the confer- ence. In B. Culliton & S. Russell (Eds.), Who will provide primary care and how will they be trained? (Preface, p. 6). Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation.
Davies, B., & Hughes, A. M. (1995). Clarification of advanced nurs- ing practice: Characteristics and competencies. Clinical Nurse Spe- cialist, 9(3), 156–160. [Classic]

Dow, A., Diazgranados, D., Mazmanian, P., & Retchin, S. (2013). Applying organizational science to healthcare: A framework for collaborative practice. Academic Medicine, 88(7) 952–957.
Fitzgerald, M. A., Jones, P. E., Lazar, B., McHugh, M., & Wang, C. (1995). fte midlevel provider: Colleague or competitor. Patient Care, 29(1), 20–37. [Classic]
Gardiner, K. M., Singleton, J. A., Sheridan, J., Kyle, G. J., & Nissen, L. M. (2019, May 6). Health professional beliefs, knowledge, and concerns surrounding medicinal cannabis—A systematic review. Plos One.
Hamric, A., & Hanson, C. (2019). Advanced nursing practice: An inte- grative approach (6th ed.). Elsevier Saunders.
Hamric, A. B., Hanson, C. M., Tracy, M. F., & O’Grady, E. M. (2014). Advanced practice nursing: An integrative approach (5th ed.). Else- vier Saunders.
Hamric, A. B., Spross, J. A., & Hanson, C. M. (2013). Advanced nursing practice: An integrative approach (5th ed.). W. B. Saunders. [Classic]
Howe, J., Cassel, C., & Vezina, M. (1998). Structuring the GITT di- dactic experience. In E. Siegler, K. Hyer, T. Fulmer, & M. Mezey (Eds.), Geriatric interdisciplinary team training (p. 90). Springer. [Classic]
Institute of Medicine. (2004). Quality chasm series: Patient safety— Achieving a new standard for care. National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2015). Assessing progress on the Institute of Medi- cine report: The future of nursing. National Academies Press.
Macy Foundation. (2010, June). Educating nurses and physicians: Toward new horizons. http://macyfoundation.org/docs/macy_pubs
/JMF_Carnegie_Summary
Matthews, S. W., & Brown, M. A. (2013). APRN expertise: fte collaborative health management model. The Nurse Practitioner, 38(1), 43–48.
Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary (11th ed.). (2020).
National Academies of Science Future of Nursing 2020–2030. (2019). https://nam.edu/publications/the-future-of-nursing-2020-2030/
National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists. (2004). Statement on clinical nurse specialist practice and education (2nd ed.).
National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists. (2007). Competency validation survey. fte Association.
National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists. (2010). The Na- tional CNS Competency Task Force: Executive summary 2006–2008. fte Association.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing Advanced Practice Reg- istered Nurses Task Force. (2006). Draft: A vision of the future of advanced practice regulation.
National Institutes of Health. (2010). Building the foundation for clin- ical research nursing: Domain of practice for the specialty of clinical research nursing.
National Patient Safety Foundation. (2015). Free from harm: Acceler- ating patient safety improvement fifteen years after To Err Is Human.



Naylor, M., Brooten, D., Jones, R., Lavizzo-Mourey, R., Mezey, M., & Pauly, M. (1994). Comprehensive discharge planning for the hos- pitalized elderly: A randomized clinical trial. Annals of Internal Medicine, 120(12), 999–1006. [Classic]
NCSBN board of directors endorses the consensus model for APRN regula- tion: Licensure, accreditation, and certification. (2008, July 7). https:// www.ncsbn.org/Consensus_Model_for_APRN_Regulation_July
_2008.pdf
Pape, T. (2000). Boyer’s model of scholarly nursing applied to profes- sional development. AORN Journal, 71(5).
Patel, E. Y., Petermann, V., & Mark, B. A. (2019, April). Does state-level nurse PR actioner scope of practice policy affect access to care? Western Journal of Nursing Research, 41(4), 488–518.
Pfeiffer, E. (1998). Why teams? In E. Siegler, K. Hyer, T. Fulmer, &
M. Mezey (Eds.), Geriatric interdisciplinary team training (p. 16). Springer. [Classic]
Riley, J. M., & Omery, A. (1996). fte scholarship of a practice disci- pline. Holistic Nursing Practice, 10(3), 7–14. [Classic]
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation/AARP Foundation. (2020). The committee for removing barriers to practice and care report.
Rounds, L., Zych, J., & Mallary, L. (2013). fte consensus model for regulation of APRNs: Implications for nurse practitioners. Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, 25(4).
Stanley, J. (2009). Reaching consensus on a regulatory model: What does this mean for APRNs? Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 5(2), 99–104.
Strumpf, N., & Whitney, F. (1994). Teaching collaborative skills to nurse practitioner students. In E. Siegler & F. Whitney (Eds.), Nurse-physician collaboration. Springer. [Classic]
Stubenrauch, J. M. (2010). AJN reports. Report on the future of nurs- ing: Recommendations aim to transform nursing education and practice. American Journal of Nursing, 110(12), 21–22. https://doi
.org/10.1097/01.NAJ.0000391228.48071.be
ftompson, J. E., & ftompson, H. O. (1985). Bioethical decision mak- ing for nurses. Appleton Century Fox. [Classic]
Tsukuda, R. A. (1990). Interdisciplinary collaboration: Teamwork in geriatrics. In C. K. Cassel, D. E. Riesenberg, L. B. Sorensen, & J. R. Walsh (Eds.), Geriatric medicine (2nd ed., pp. 668–675). Springer-Verlag. [Classic]
Tuckman, B. W. (1965). Developmental sequences in small groups.
Psychological Bulletin, 63(1), 384–399. [Classic]

CHAPTER 13
ACP Journal Club (2020, August 2). ACP Journal Club. https:// www.acponline.org/clinical-information/journals-publications
/acp-journal-club
Amante, D. J., Hogan, T. P., Pagoto, S. L., English, T. M., & Lapane,
K. L. (2015). Access to care and use of the Internet to search for health information: Results from the US National Health Inter- view Survey. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 17, e106. https:// doi.org/10.2196/jmir.4126

Ben, J., Cormack, D., Harris, R., & Paradies, Y. (2017). Racism and health service utilization: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Plos One, 12, e0189900.
Benner, P. (2001) From novice to expert: Excellence and power in clinical nursing practice. Prentice-Hall.
Benner, P. (2015). Curricular and pedagogical implications for the Carnegie Study, educating nurses: A call for radical transforma- tion. Asian Nursing Research, 9, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.anr.2015.02.001, 10.1016/j.anr.2015.02.001
Benner, P., Sutphen, M., Leonard, V., & Day, L. (2010). Educating nurses: A call for radical transformation. Jossey-Bass.
Benner, P., & Tanner, C. (1987). Clinical judgment: How expert nurses use intuition. American Journal of Nursing, 87(1), 23–31.
Benner, P., Tanner, C. A., & Chesla, C. A. (2009). Expertise in nursing practice: Caring, clinical judgment, and ethics (2nd ed.). Springer.
Blumenthal-Barby, J. S., & Krieger, H. (2015). Cognitive biases and heuristics in medical decision making: A critical review using a systematic search strategy. Medical Decision Making, 35, 539–557. https://doi.org/10.1177/0272989X14547740
Brouwers M. C., Kerkvliet, K., & Spithoff, K. (2016, March 8). AGREE Next Steps Consortium. fte AGREE reporting checklist: A tool to improve reporting of clinical practice guidelines [Pub- lished correction appears in BMJ 2016, September 6, 354, i4852]. BMJ, 2016, 352, i1152. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i1152
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Harvard University Press.
Bryson, J. (2020). Integrating evidence-based practice utilizing the clinical judgment model. Nurse Educator. https://doi.org/10.1097
/NNE.0000000000000811
Bussard, M. E. (2016). Self-reflection of video-recorded high-fidel- ity simulations and development of clinical judgment. Journal of Nursing Education, 55, 522–527.
Campbell, K., Massey, D., Broadbent, J., & Clarke, K. A. (2018). Factors influencing clinical decision-making used by mental health nurses to provide provisional diagnosis: a scoping review. Inter- national Journal of Mental Health Nursing, 28(2). https://doi.org
.liboff.ohsu.edu/10.111/inm.12553
Cappelletti, A., Engel, J., & Prentice, D. (2014). Systematic re- view of clinical judgment and reasoning in nursing. Jour- nal of Nursing Education, 53(8), 453–458. https://doi
.org/10.3928/01484834-20140724-01
Catherine Framp, A., McAllister, M., & Dwyer, T. (2019). Narrative research methods with vulnerable people: Sharing insights. Nurse Researcher, 27, 42–47. https://doi.org/10.7748/nr.2019.e1671
Center for Evidence-Based Medicine. (2020, August 2). https://www
.cebm.net/ebm-library/
Charon, R., DasGupta, S., Hermann, N., Irvine, C., Marcus, E. R., Colon, E. R., Spencer, D., & Spiegel, M. (2017). Principles and practice of narrative medicine. Oxford University Press.
Childress, M. (2017). From doctors’ stories to doctors’ stories and back again. AMA Journal of Ethics. https://journalofethics.ama-assn.org
/article/doctors-stories-doctors-stories-and-back-again/2017-03



Chua, W. L., Legido-Quigley, H. L., Ng, P. Y., McKenna, L., Hassan,
N. B., & Liaw, S. Y. (2019). Seeing the whole picture in enrolled and registered nurses’ experiences in recognizing clinical deterio- ration in general ward patients: a qualitative study. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 95, 56–64.
Costa, A. B., Pase, P. F., de Camargo, E. S., Guaranha, C., Cae- tano, A. H., Kveller, D., da Rosa Filho, H. T., Catelan, R. F., Koller, S. H., & Nardi, H. C.. (2016). Effectiveness of a multidi- mensional web-based intervention program to change Brazilian health practitioners; attitudes toward the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender population. Journal of Health Psychology, 21, 2138–2144.
Coxeter, P., Del Mar, C. B., McGregor, L., Beller, E. M., & Hoffman,
T. C. (2015). Interventions to facilitate shared decision making to address antibiotic use for acute respiratory infections in pri- mary care. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. https://doi.org
.liboff.ohsu.edu/10.1002/14651858.cd010907.pub2
Craig, J. V., & Dowding, D. (2019). The evidence-based practice manual for nurses (4th ed.). Elsevier.
Croskerry, P. (2009). A universal model of diagnostic reasoning. Aca- demic Medicine, 84, 1022–1028.
Croskerry, P., Petrie, D. A., Reilly, J. B., & Tait, G. (2014). Deciding about fast and slow decisions. Academic Medicine, 89, 197–200.
Dang, D., & Dearholt, S. (2017). Johns Hopkins nursing evidence-based practice: Model and guidelines (3rd ed.). Sigma fteta Tau International.
Dearlove, O. R., Rogers, J., & Sharples, A. (1996). Evidence-based medicine. Authors’ redefinition is better but not perfect [Letter; comment]. BMJ, 313, 170–171.
Dickison, P., Haerling, K. A., & Lasater, K. (2019). Integrating the National Council of State Boards of Nursing Clinical Judgment Model into nursing educational frameworks. Journal of Nursing Education, 58, 72–78.
Dickison, P., Haerling, K. A., & Lasater, K. (2020). NCSBN Clinical Judgment Measurement Model clarification. Journal of Nursing Education, 59, 365.
Duncombe, D. C. (2018). A multi-institutional study of the perceived barriers and facilitators to implementing evidence-based practice. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 27(5–6), 1216–1226. https://doi
.org/10.1111/jocn.14168
Elia, F., Aprà, F., & Crupi, V. (2018). Understanding and improv- ing decisions in clinical medicine (II): Making sense of reasoning in practice. Internal and Emergency Medicine, 13(2), 287–289. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11739-017-1740-7
Facchiano, L., & Snyder, C. H. (2013). Evidence-based practice for the busy nurse practitioner: Part four: Putting it all together. Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, 25, 24–31. https:// doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-7599.2012.00751.x
Fernandez-Moure, J. S. (2016). Lost in translation: fte gap in sci- entific advancements and clinical application. Frontiers in Bioen- gineering and Biotechnology, 4, 43. https://www.frontiersin.org/ article/10.3389/fbioe.2016.00043

Fitzgerald, C., & Hurst, S. (2017). Implicit bias in healthcare profes- sionals: A systematic review. BMC Medical Ethics, 18, 19. https:// doi.org/10.1186/s12910-017-0179-8
Forneris, S. G., Neal, D. O., Tiffany, J., Kuehn, M. B., Meyer, H. M., Blazovich, L. M., Holland, A. E., & Smerillo, M. (2015). Enhanc- ing clinical reasoning through simulation debriefing: A multisite study. Nursing Education Perspectives, 36, 304–310. https://doi
.org/10.5480/15-1672
Forsberg, E., Ziegert, K., Hult, H., & Fors, U. (2014). Clinical rea- soning in nursing, a think-aloud study using virtual patients—a base for an innovative assessment. Nurse Education Today, 34(4), 538–542.
Gagliardi, A. R., Berta, W., Kothari, A., Boyko, J., & Urquhart, R. (2016). Integrated knowledge translation (IKT) in health care: A scoping review. Implementation Science (11), 38.
Gleason, K. T., Davidson, P. M., Tanner, E. K., Baptiste, D., Rushton, C., Day, J., Sawyer, M., Baker, D., Paine, L., Dennison Himmel- farb, C. R., & Newman-Toker, D. E. (2017). Defining the critical role of nurses in diagnostic error prevention: A conceptual frame- work and a call to action. Diagnosis, 4, 201–210.
Gonzalez, L. (2018). Teaching clinical reasoning piece by piece: A clin- ical reasoning concept-based learning method. Journal of Nursing Education, 57, 727–735.
Greenhalgh, T., Howick, J., & Maskrey, N. (2014). Evidence-based medicine renaissance group. Evidence based medicine: A move- ment in crisis? BMJ, 348(g3725).
Guyatt, G. H., Sackett, D. L., Cook, D. J., Guyatt, G., Bass, E., Brill-Edwards, P., Browman, G., Cook, D., Farkouh, M., Gerstein, H., Haynes, B., Hayward, R., Holbrook, A., Jaeschke, R., Juniper, E., Laupacis, A., Lee, H., Levine, M., Moyer, V., . . . Wilson, M. (1994). Users’ guides to the medical literature: II. How to use an article about therapy or prevention B. What were the results and will they help me in caring for my patients? JAMA, 271(1), 59–63. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.1994.03510250075039
Haider, A. H., Schneider, E. B., Sriram, N., Scott, V. K., Swoboda,
S. M., Zogg, C. K., Dhiman, N., Haut, E. R., Efron, D. T., Pro- novost, P. J., Freischlag, J. A., Lipsett, P. A., Cornwell, E. E., 3rd., MacKenzie, E. J., & Cooper, L. A. (2015). Unconscious race and class biases among registered nurses: Vignette based study using implicit association testing. Journal of the American College of Sur- geons, 220(6), 1277–1286.
Hall, W. J., Chapman, M. V., Lee, K. M., Merino, Y. M., ftomas, T.
W., Payne, B. K., Eng, E., Day, S. H., & Coyne-Beasley, T. (2015). Implicit racial/ethnic bias among health care professional and its influence on health care outcome: A systematic review. American Journal of Public Health, 105(12), e60-e76.
Haynes, R. B., Sackett, D. L., Guyatt, G. H., & Tugwell, P. (2006). Clinical epidemiology: How to do clinical practice research (3rd ed.). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Heelan-Fancher, L., Edmonds, J. K., & Jones, E. J. (2019). De- creasing barriers to research utilization among labor and delivery nurses. Nursing Research, 68(6), E1–E7. https://doi.org/10.1097
/NNR.0000000000000388



Hines, C. B., & Wood, F. G. (2016). Clinical judgment scripts as a strategy to foster clinical judgments. Journal of Nursing Education, 55, 691–695.
Hoffman, K. A., Aitken, L. M., & Duffield, C. (2009). A comparison of novice and expert nurses’ cue collection during clinical decision-making. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 46(10), 1335–1344.
Institute of Medicine. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 21st century. Committee on Quality of Health Care in America. National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2003). Unequal treatment: Confronting racial and ethnic disparities in health care. National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/12875
Institute of Medicine. (2004). Keeping patients safe: Transforming the work environment of nurses. National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2008). Knowing what works in health care: A roadmap for the nation. National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2010). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2011). Finding what works in health care: Stan- dards for systematic reviews. National Academies Press.
Izumi, S., Barfield, P. A., Basin, B., Mood, L., Neunzert, C., Tadesse, R., Bradley, K. J., & Tanner, C. A. (2018). Care coordi- nation: Identifying and connecting the most appropriate care to the patients. Research in Nursing & Health, 41, 49–56. https://doi
.org/10.1002/nur.21843
Jacobs, S., & Krainovich-Miller, B. (2019). Search and critical ap- praisal of literature. In G. LoBiondo-Wood, J. Haber, & M. Titler (Eds.), Evidence-based practice for nursing and healthcare quality im- provement (pp. 40–58). Elsevier.
Joanna Briggs Institute. (2020, August 2). http://www.joannabriggs
.org; http://latrobe.libguides.com/JoannaBriggs
Jordan, Z., Lockwood, C., Aromataris, E., & Munn, Z. (2016). The updated JBI model for evidence-based healthcare. fte Joanna Briggs Institute.
Kleinman, A. (1988). Illness narratives: Suffering, healing and the hu- man condition. Basic Books.
Kononowicz, A. A., Woodham, L. A., Edelbring, S., Stathakarou, N., Davies, D., Saxena, N., Car, L. T., Carlstedt-Duke, J., Car, J., & Zary, N. (2019). Virtual patient simulations in health professions education: Systematic review and meta-analysis by the digital health education collaboration. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 21, e14676. https://doi.org/10.2196/14676
Lasater, K., & Nielsen, A. (2009). Reflective journaling for clinical judgment development and evaluation. Journal of Nursing Educa- tion, 48, 40–44. https://doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20090101-06
Lavoie, P., Clarke, S. P., Clausen, C., Purden, M., Emed, J., Cosencova, L., & Frunchak, V. (2020a). Nursing handoffs and clinical judg- ments regarding patient risk of deterioration: A mixed methods study. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 7/9.
Lavoie, P., Clarke, S. P., Clausen, C., Purden, M., Emed, J., Mailhot, T., Fontaine, G., & Frunchak, V. (2020b). Nurses’ judgments of

patient risk of deterioration at change-of-shift handoff: Agreement between nurses and comparison with early warning scores. Heart & Lung, 49(4), 420–425.
Lavoie, P., Pepin, J., & Cossette, S. (2015). Development of a post- simulation debriefing intervention to prepare nurses and nursing students to care for deteriorating patients. Nurse Education in Prac- tice, 15, 181–191.
Lawson, T. N. (2018). Diagnostic reasoning and cognitive biases of nurse practitioners. Journal of Nursing Education, 57, 203–208. https://doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20180322-03
Lean Keng, S., & AlQudah, H. N. (2017). Assessment of cognitive bias in decision-making and leadership styles among critical care nurses: A mixed methods study. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 73, 465–481. https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.13142
Lee, J. H., Lee, Y. J., Bae, J. Y., & Seo, M. (2016). Registered nurses’ clinical reasoning skills and reasoning process: A think-aloud study. Nurse Education Today, 46, 75–80.
Legare, F., Adekpedjou, R., Stacey, D., Turcotte, S., Kryworuchko, J., Graham, I. D., Lyddiatt, A., Politi, M. C., ftomson, R., Elwyn, G., & Donner-Banzhoff, N. (2018). Interventions for increasing the use of shared decision-making by health care pro- fessionals. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 7. https://doi
.org/10.1002/14651858CD006732.pub4
Levett-Jones, T., Hoffman, K., Dempsey, J., Jeong, S. Y., Noble, D., Norton, C. A., Roche, J., & Hickey, N. (2010). fte five rights of clinical reasoning: an educational model to enhance nursing stu- dents’ ability to identify and manage clinically “at risk patients.” Nurse Education Today, 30, 515–520.
Lewis, T. T., Cogburn, C. D., & Williams, D. R. (2015). Self-reported experiences of discrimination and health: Scientific advances, on- going controversies, and emerging issues. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 11, 407–440.
Mackey, A., & Bassendowski, S. (2017). fte history of evi- dence-based practice in nursing education and practice. Jour- nal of Professional Nursing, 33, 51–55. https://doi.org/10.1016
/j.profnurs.2016.05.009
Maina, I. W., Belton, T. D., Ginzberg, S., Singh, A., & Johnson, T. J. (2018). A decade of studying implicit racial/ethnic bias in health- care providers using the implicit association test. Social Science and Medicine, 199, 219–229.
Mathieson, A., Grande, G., & Luker, K. (2019). Strategies, facilita- tors and barriers to implementation of evidence-based practice in community nursing: A systematic mixed-studies review and qual- itative synthesis. Primary Health Care Research & Development, 20, e6. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1463423618000488, 10.1017
/S1463423618000488
McCarthy, M. C. (2003). Situated clinical reasoning: Distinguishing acute confusion from dementia in hospitalized older adults. Re- search in Nursing and Health, 26(2), 90–101.
Melnyk, B. M. (2016). fte doctor of nursing practice degree = evidence-based practice expert. Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing, 13(3), 183–184.



Melnyk, B. M., & Fineout-Overholt, E. (2019). Evidence-based prac- tice in nursing and healthcare (4th ed.). Wolters Kluwer Health.
Melnyk, B. M., Gallagher-Ford, L., Long, L. E., & Fineout-Overholt,
E. (2014). fte establishment of evidence-based practice competen- cies for practicing registered nurses and advanced practice nurses in real-world clinical settings: Proficiencies to improve healthcare quality, reliability, patient outcomes, and costs. Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing, 11, 5–15.
Melnyk, B. M., Gallagher-Ford, L., Zellefrow, C., Tucker, S., ftomas, B., Sinnott, L. T., & Tan, A. (2018). fte first U.S. study on nurses’ evidence-based practice competencies indicates major deficits that threaten healthcare quality, safety, and patient outcomes. Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing, 15(1), 16–25. https://doi
.org/10.1111/wvn.12269
Mickleborough, T. (2015). Intuition in medical practice: A reflection on Donald Schon’s reflective practitioner. Medical Teacher, 37(10), 889–891.
Milky, G., & ftomas, J., 3rd. (2020). Shared decision making, satis- faction with care and medication adherence among patients with diabetes. Patient Education & Counseling, 103, 661–669. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2019.10.008
Milhomme, D., Gagnon, J., & Lechasseur, K. (2018). fte clinical surveillance process as carried out by expert nurses in a critical care context: A theoretical explanation. Intensive and Critical Care Nursing, 44, 24–30.
Mitchell, G. J. (1999). Practice applications. Evidence-based practice: Critique and alternative view. Nursing Science Quarterly, 12(1), 30–35.
Nagel, D. A., Stacey, D., Momtahan, K., Gifford, W., Doucet, S., & Etowa, J. B. (2017). Getting a picture: A grounded theory of nurses knowing the person in a virtual environment. Journal of Ho- listic Nursing, 35(1), 67–85.
Najjar, R. H., Lyman, B., & Miehl, N. (2015). Nursing students’ experiences with high-fidelity simulation. International Journal  of Nursing Education Scholarship, 12. https://doi.org/10.1515
/ijnes-2015-0010
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2015). Improving diagnosis in health care. National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/21794
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2019). Leader to leader.
  https://www.ncsbn.org/NGN_Spring19_ENG_29Aug2019.pdf Nibbelink, C. W., & Brewer, B. B. (2018). Decision-making in nurs-
ing practice: An integrative literature review. Journal of Clinical
Nursing, 27(5–6), 917–928.
Nolan, S., Hendricks, J., Williamson, M., & Ferguson, S. (2018). Us- ing narrative inquiry to listen to the voices of adolescent mothers in relation to their use of social networking sites (SNS). Journal of Ad- vanced Nursing, 74, 743–751. https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.13458
Norman, G. R., Monteiro, S. D., Sherbino, J., Ilgen, J. S., Schmidt, H. G., & Mamede, S. (2017). fte causes of errors in clinical reasoning: Cognitive biases, knowledge deficits, and dual process thinking. Academic Medicine, 92, 23–30.

Padden-Denmead, M. L., Scaffidi, R. M., Kerley, R. M. & Farside, A. L. (2016). Simulation with debriefing and guided reflective journal- ing to stimulate critical thinking in prelicensure baccalaureate de- gree nursing students. Journal of Nursing Education, 55, 645–650. https://doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20161011-07
Page-Cutrara, K., & Turk, M. (2017). Impact of prebriefing on com- petency performance, clinical judgment and experience in simu- lation: An experimental study. Nurse Education Today, 48, 78–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nedt.2016.09.012
Parker-Tomlin, M., Boschen, M., Glendon, I., & Morrissey, S. (2019). Factors influencing health practitioners’ cognitive processing and decision-making style. Journal of Interprofessional Care, 33, 546–557. https://doi.org/10.1080/13561820.2018.1551866
Pfrimmer, D. M., Johnson, M. R., Buthmiller, M. L., Lehman, J. L., Ernste, V. K., & Rhudy, L. M. (2017). Surveillance: A nursing intervention for improving patient safety in critical care environ- ment. Dimensions of Critical Care Nursing, 36(1), 45–52.
Price, A., Zulkosky, K., White, K., & Pretz, J. (2017). Accuracy of in- tuition in clinical decision-making among novice clinicians. Jour- nal of Advanced Nursing, 73(5), 1147–1157.
Ragan, S. L., & Kanter, E. (2017). Learning the patient’s story. Semi- nars in Oncology Nursing, 33(5), 467–474.
Razieh, S., Somayeh, G., & Fariba, H. (2018). Effects of reflection on clinical decision-making of intensive care unit nurses. Nurse Educa- tion Today,  66, 10–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nedt.2018.03.009
Rennke, S., Yuan, P., Monash, B., Blankenburg, R., Chua, I., Harman, S., Sakai, D. S., Khan, A., Hilton, J. F., Shieh, L., & Satterfiled,
J. (2017.) fte SDM 3 Circle Model: A literature synthesis and adaptation for shared decision making in the hospital. Journal of Hospital Medicine, 12(12), 1001–1008.
Renolen, Å., Hjälmhult, E., Høye, S., Danbolt, L. J., & Kirkevold, M. (2019). Evidence-based practice integration in hospital wards— fte complexities and challenges in achieving evidence-based prac- tice in clinical nursing. Nursing Open, 6(3), 815–823. https://doi
.org/10.1002/nop2.259
Robstad, N., Westergren, T., Siebler, F., Söderhamn, U., & Fegran, L. (2019). Intensive care nurses’ implicit and explicit attitudes and their behavioral intentions towards obese intensive care patients. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 75, 3621–3642.
Rogers, M. (2019). No journals, no evidence-based practice: Re- search inaccessibility affects many nurses. MCN, American Jour- nal of Maternal Child Nursing, 44, 309. https://doi.org/10.1097
/NMC.0000000000000573,   10.1097/NMC.0000000000000573
Romero-Brufau, M. G., Gaines, K., Nicolas, C. T., Johnson, M. G., Hickman, J., & Huddleston, J. M. (2019). fte fifth vital sign? Nurse worry predicts inpatient deterioration within 24 hours. JAMIA Open, 2(4), 465–470.
Schaa, K. L., Roter, D. L., Biesecker, B. B., Cooper, L. A., & Erby, L. H. (2015). Genetic counselors’ implicit racial attitudes and their rela- tionship to communication. Health Psychology, 34, 111–119.
Shea, B. J., Reeves, B. C., Wells, G., ftuku, M., Hamel, C., Moran, J., Moher, D., Tugwell, P., Welch, V., Kristjansson, E., & Henry, D. A.



(2017). AMSTAR 2: A critical appraisal tool for systematic reviews that include randomised or non-randomised studies of healthcare interventions, or both. BMJ (Clinical research ed.), 358, j4008. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.j4008
Smith, B. H. (1996). Evidence-based medicine. Rich sources of evi- dence are ignored. British Medical Journal, 313(7050), 169–171.
Sox, H. C., Higgins, M. C., & Owens, D. K. (2013). Medi-      cal decision making (2nd ed.). Wiley Online. https://doi.org
/10.1002/9781118341544. American College of Physicians.
Stevens, K. (2013). fte impact of evidence-based practice in nursing and the next big ideas. OJIN: The Online Journal of Issues in Nurs- ing, 18(2), Manuscript 4.
Strømme, T., Aase, K., & Tjoflåt, I. (2020). Homecare professionals’ observation of deteriorating, frail older patients: A mixed-methods study. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 29(13–14), 2429–2440.
Straus, S. E., Glasziou, P., Richardson, W. S., & Haynes, R. B. (2019). Evidence-based medicine: How to practice and teach EBM (5th ed.). Elsevier.
Straus, S. E., Tetroe, J., & Graham, I. D. (2013). Knowledge translation in health care: Moving from evidence to practice (2nd ed.). Oxford.
Tanner, C. A. (1998). Clinical judgment and evidence-based practice: Conclusions and controversies. Communicating Nursing Research, 31(2), 19–35.
Tanner, C. A. (2006). ftinking like a nurse: A research-based model of clinical judgment in nursing. Journal of Nursing Education, 45(6), 204–211.
Tanner, C. A., Benner, P., Chesla, C., & Gordon, D. R. (1993). fte phenomenology of knowing the patient. Image: The Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 25(4), 273–280.
ftompson, S., Moorley, C., & Barratt, J. (2017). A comparative study on the clinical decision-making processes of nurse practitioners vs. medical doctors using scenarios in a secondary care environment. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 73, 1097–1110.
Timbrell, J. (2017). Instructional storytelling: Application of the clin- ical judgment model in nursing. Journal of Nursing Education, 56, 305–308.
Truglio-Londrigan, M., & Slyer, J. T. (2018). Shared decision-making for nursing practice: An integrative review. The Open Nursing Jour- nal, 12, 1–14.
TRUST Scorecard. (2020, August 2). ECRI guidelines trust. https:// guidelines.ecri.org/about-trust-scorecard
Vincent, D., Hastings-Tolsma, M., Gephart, S., & Alfonzo, P. M. (2015). Nurse practitioner clinical decision-making  and evidence-based practice. Nurse Practitioner, 40, 47–54. https://doi
.org/10.1097/01.NPR.0000463783.42721.ef
Weaver, R. R. (2015). Reconciling evidence-based medicine and patient-centered care: Defining evidence-based inputs to patient-centered decisions. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Prac- tice, 21(6), 1076–1080. https://doi.org/10.1111/jep.12465
Wensing, M., & Grol, R. (2019). Knowledge translation in health: How implementation science could contribute more. BMC Medi- cine, 17, 88. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-019-1322-9

Wheeler, P. L., Butell, S. S., Epeneter, B. J., Langford, C. A., & Taylor, J. D. (2016). Storytelling: A guided reflection activ- ity. Journal of Nursing Education, 55, 172–176. https://doi.org
/10.3928/01484834-20160216-10
Williams, D. R., Lawrence, J. A., & Davis, B. A. (2019). Racism and health: Evidence and needed research. Annual Review of Public Health, 40, 105–125.
Zachariasse, J. M., van der Lee, D., Seiger, N., de Vos-Kerkhof, E., Oostenbrink, R., & Moll, H. A. (2017). Archives of Disease in Childhood, 102, 1052–1056.
Zolnierek, C.D. (2013). An integrative review of knowing the pa- tient. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 46(1). https://doi.org/10.111
/jnu.12049
CHAPTER 14
AARP. (2015). New state law to help family caregivers. http://www.aarp
.org/politics-society/advocacy/caregiving-advocacy/info-2014
/aarp-creates-model-state-bill.html
AARP. (2016). The policy book. http://www.aarp.org/policybook Abbot, A. (1988). The system of professions: Essays on the division of ex-
pert labor. University Press of Chicago. [Classic]
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2006). The essentials of doctoral education for advanced nursing practice. [Update planned for 2021]
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2011). The essentials of master’s education in nursing. [Update planned for 2021]
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2016). W. Keith Barnill receives AANA’s 15th annual Ira P. Gunn Award for outstanding pro- fessional advocacy.
American College of Nurse Midwives. (2012). Midwifery: Evidence-based practice.
American Nurses Association. (2015). Guide to the code of ethics for nurses. American Nurses Publishing. [Latest edition]
Benner, P. (1984). From novice to expert: Excellence and power in clinical nursing practice. Addison-Wesley. [Classic]
Benner, P. (1991). fte role of experience, narrative and community in skilled ethical comportment. Advances in Nursing Science, 14(2),
1. [Classic]
Bishop, A., & Scudder, J. (1990). The practical and moral and personal sense of nursing: A phenomenological philosophy of practice. State Uni- versity of New York Press. [Classic]
Brassard, A. (2021). Political context of advanced practice nursing. In
D. J. Mason, E. Dickson, M. R. McLemore, & G. A. Perez (Eds.),
Policy & politics in nursing and health care (8th ed.). Elsevier.
Callister, L. C., & Freeborn, D. (2007). Nurse midwives with women: Ways of knowing in nurse midwives. International Journal for Human Caring, 11(1), 8–15.
Cleveland Clinic. (2014). Midwife is equal parts nurse, coach, advo- cate. https://health.clevelandclinic.org/2014/12/midwife-is-equal- parts-nurse-coach-advocate/
Connolly, P. M. (1999). Consumer advocacy. In C. A. Shea, L. R. Pelletier, E. C. Poster, G. W. Stuart, & M. P. Verhey (Eds.), Advanced



practice nursing in psychiatric and mental health care. Mosby. [Classic]
Curtain, L. L. (1979). fte nurse as advocate: A philosophical founda- tion for nursing. Advances in Nursing Science, 1(3), 1–10. [Classic] Foley, B. J., Minick, M. P., & Kee, C. C. (2002). How nurses
learn advocacy. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 34(2), 181–187.
[Classic]
Gadow, S. (1980). Existential advocacy: Philosophical foundation of nursing. In S. F. Spicker & S. Gadow (Eds.), Nursing: Images and ideals. Springer. [Classic]
Gadow, S. (1989). Clinical subjectivity. Advocacy for silent  patients.
   Nursing Clinics of North America, 24(2), 535–541. [Classic] Gardner, D. (2005). Ten lessons in collaboration. OJIN: The Online
Journal of Issues in Nursing, 10(1), Manuscript 1. [Classic]
Gardner, D. B. (2014). Walking the talk for patient-centered care: An interview with Eileen O’Grady, wellness coach. Nursing Eco- nomic$, 32(2), 99–100.
Gates, B. (1995). Whose best interest? Nursing Times, 91(4), 31–32. [Classic]
Gazarian, P. K, Fernberg, L. M., & Sheehan, K. D. (2016). Effective- ness of narrative pedagogy in developing student nurses’ advocacy role. Nursing Ethics, 23(2), 132–141.
Hado, E., & Feinberg, L. F. (2020, May). Amid the COVID-19 pan- demic, meaningful communication between family caregivers and residents of long-term care facilities is imperative. Journal of Aging & Social Policy, 1–6.
Hafner, K. (2020, March 29). “A heart-wrenching thing”: Hospital bans on visits devastate families. New York Times.
Hanks. R. G. (2010). fte medical-surgical nurse perspective of advo- cate role. Nursing Forum, 45(2), 97–107.
Hanks, R. G., Eloi, H., & Stafford, L. (2019). Understanding how advanced practice registered nurses function as patient advocates. Nursing Forum, 54, 213–219.
Hess, D. R., Dossey, B. M., Southard, M. E., Luck, S., Schaub, B. G., & Bark, L. (2013). The art and science of nurse coaching: The provid- er’s guide to coaching scope and competencies. Nursesbooks.org. [New edition planned for 2021]
Hewitt, J. A. (2002). Critical review of the arguments debating the role of the nurse advocate. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 37(5), 439–445. [Classic]
Institute of Medicine. (2010). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id
=12956&page=R1
Joel, L. (1998). On citizenship in a great profession. American Journal of Nursing, 98(4), 7. [Classic]
Jones, E. (1982). Advocacy—A tool for radical nursing curriculum planners. Journal of Nurse Education, 21(1), 40–45. [Classic]
Kung, Y. M., & Lugo, N. R. (2014). Political advocacy and practice barriers: A survey of Florida APRNs. Journal of the American Asso- ciation of Nurse Practitioners, 27, 145–151.
Levine, C., Halper, D. E., Rutberg, J. C., & Gould, D. A. (2013). Engag- ing family caregivers as partners in transition. United Hospital Fund.

Mason, D. J., Dickson, E., McLemore, M. R., & Perez, G. A. (Eds.). (2021). Policy and politics in nursing and health care (8th ed.). Elsevier/Mosby/Saunders.
Milette, B. (1993). Client advocacy and the moral orientation of nurses. Western Journal of Nursing Research, 15(5), 607–618.
Mitchell, G., & Bournes, D. (2000). Nurse as patient advocate? In search of straight thinking. Nursing Science Quarterly, 13(3), 204–
209. [Classic]
Mund, A. (2021). Healthcare policy for advocacy in healthcare. In M. Zaccagnini & J Pechacek (Eds.), The doctor of nursing practice essen- tials (4th ed.). Jones Bartlett.
Paquin, S. O. (2011). Social justice advocacy in nursing. Creative Nurs- ing, 17(2), 63–67.
Pehrson, C., Banerjee, S. C., Manna, R., Shen, M. J., Hammonds, S., Coyle, N., Krueger, C. A., Maloney, E., Zaider, T., & Bylund, C.
L. (2016). Responding empathetically to patients: Development, implementation, and evaluation of a communication skills train- ing module for oncology nurses. Patient Education and Counseling, 99(4), 610–616.
Reed, S. (2020). NPI: Why every CNS needs one. Clinical Nurse Spe- cialist, 34(4).
Reinhard, S., Levine, C., & Samis, S. (2012). Home alone: Family care- givers providing complex chronic care. A report of the AARP Public Policy Institute and the United Hospital Fund. AARP.
Reinhard, S., Young, H. M., Levine, C., Kelly, K., Choula, R., & Ac- cius, J. (2019). Home alone revisited: Family caregivers providing complex chronic care. AARP.
Schroeder, C., & Gadow, G. (2000). An advocacy approach to ethics and community health. In E. Anderson & J. McFarlane (Eds.), Community as partner: Theory and practice in nursing (3rd ed.). Lip- pincott Williams & Wilkins. [Classic]
Stein, L., Watts, D., & Howell, T. (1990). fte doctor-nurse game revisited. New England Journal of Medicine, 322(8), 546–549. [Classic]
Swarbrick, M., Murphy, A. A., Zechner, M., Spagnolo, A. B., & Gill,
A. J. (2011). Wellness coaching: A new role for peers. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 34(4), 328–331.
Taylor, M. R. S. (2016). Impact of advocacy initiatives on nurses’ mo- tivation to sustain momentum in public policy advocacy. Journal of Professional Nursing, 32(3), 235–245.
ftrasher, C. (2002). fte primary care nurse practitioner: Advocate for self-care. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 14(3), 113–117. [Classic]
Towers, J. (2017). Advanced practice nurses and prescriptive authority. In L. A. Joel (Ed.), Advanced practice nursing: Essentials for role de- velopment (4th ed.). F.A. Davis.
Trogen, B. (2018, August 2). Do hospital visitors impact patient out- comes? Clinical Correlations—The NYU Langone Health Online Journal of Medicine.
Vargas, R. A. (2020, May 7). “I had a message to share”: New Orleans nurse rebuked by Trump stands by PPE shortages comments. The Times-Picayune; The New Orleans Advocate.



CHAPTER 15
Abelson, R. (2020, January 8). ftese patients are hard to treat.
New York Times. https:/www.nytimes.com/2020/01
Aliotta, S. L. (2000). Focus on case management: Linking outcomes and accountability. Top Health Information Management Journal, 20(3), 11–16. [Classic]
American Nurses Association. (1992). Case management by nurses.
[Classic]
Bodenheimer, T., & Bauer, L. (2016, September 15). Rethinking the primary care workforce—An expanded role for nurses. New England Journal of Medicine, 6(375), 1015–1017.
Boville, D., Saran, M., Salem, J. K., & Clough, L. (2007). An in- novative role for nurse practitioners in managing chronic disease. Nursing Economic$, 25(6), 359–364.
Bower, K. S. (1992). Case management by nurses (2nd ed., pp. 13–15).
American Nurses Association. [Classic]
Boyd, C. M., Reider, L., Frey, K., Scharfstein, D., Leff, B., Wolff, J., & Boult, C. (2009). fte effects of guided care on the perceived quality of health care for multi-morbid older persons: 18-month outcomes from a cluster-randomized controlled trial. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 25(3), 235–242. [Classic]
Brault, G. L., & Kissinger, L. D. (1991). Case management: Ambiguous at best. Journal of Pediatric Health Care, 5(4), 179–183. [Classic]
Brooten, D., & Naylor, M. D. (1995). Nurses’ effect on changing pa- tient outcomes. Image, 27(2), 95–99. [Classic]
Brown, T. (2018, August 9). How to quantify a nurse’s “gut feelings”: I had a nagging sense that something was wrong, but I couldn’t articulate it [Opinion section]. New York Times. https://nytimes
.com/2018/08/09/opinion/sunday/nurses-gut-feelings-rothman
.html?referringSource-articleShare
Buhler-Wilkerson, K. (1993). Public health then and now: Bringing care to the people. American Journal of Public Health, 83(12), 1778–1786. [Classic]
Calkin, J. (1984). A model for advanced nursing practice. Journal of Nursing Administration, 14(1), 24–30. [Classic]
Case Management Society of America. (1995). Standards of practice for case management. [Classic]
Case Management Society of America. (2016). Standards of practice for case management [2016 revision]. http://www.cmsa.org/portals/0
/pdf/memberonly/StandardsOfPractice.pdf
Cesta, T., & Tahan, H. A. (2003). The case manager’s survival guide
(2nd ed.). Mosby.
Christopher, M. A., Hawkey, R., & Jared, M. (2016). Lillian D. Wald: Pioneer of public health. In D. A. Forrester (Ed.), Nursing’s greatest leaders, a history of activism (pp. 195–222). Springer.
Connors, H. R. (1993). Impact of care management modalities on curricula. In K. Kelly & M. Maas (Eds.), Managing nursing care (pp. 190–207). Mosby. [Classic]
Cronin, C. J., & Maklebust, J. (1989). Case-managed care: Capital- izing on the CNS. Nursing Management, 20(3), 38–47. [Classic]

Curtis, K., Lien, D., Chan, A., Grove, P., & Morris, R. (2002). fte impact of trauma case management on patient outcomes. Journal of Trauma: Injury, Infection and Critical Care, 53(3), 477–482.
Dancer, S., & Courtney, M. (2010). Improving diabetes patient out- comes: Framing research into the chronic care model. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 22, 580–585.
Daniels, S., & Ramey, M. (2005). The leaders guide to hospital case man- agement. Jones & Bartlett Learning.
David, G., Smith-McLallen, A., & Ukert, B., (2019, March). fte effect of predictive analysis driven interventions on healthcare utilization. Journal of Health Economics, 64, 68–79. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.jhealtheco.2019.02.002
Dizikes, P. (2020, January 8). In healthcare, does “hotspotting” make patients better? MIT News. https://news.mit.edu/2020
/health-care-hotspotting-no-effect-0108
Dock, L. (1937). Whence the term “public health nursing”? Public Health Nursing, 29(12), 712–714. [Classic]
Erickson, S. M. (1997). Managing case management across the contin- uum: An organized response to managed care. Seminars for Nurse Managers, 5(3), 124–128. [Classic]
Falter, E. J., Cesta, T. G., Concert, C., & Mason, D. J. (1999). Devel- opment of a graduate program in case management. Journal of Care Management, 5(3), 50–56, 72, 74, 76–78. [Classic]
Finkelstein, A., Ahou, A., Taubman, S., & Doyle, J. (2020, January 9). Health care hotspotting—A randomized controlled trial. New England Journal of Medicine, 382(2), 152–162. https://doi.org
/10.1056/NEJMsa1906848
Forman, S., & Kelliher, M. (1999). StatusOne: Breakthroughs in high risk population health management. Jossey-Bass. [Classic]
Frachel, R. R. (1988). A new profession: fte evolution of public health nursing. Public Health Nursing, 5(2), 86–90. [Classic]
Fraher, E., Spetz, J., & Naylor, M. (2015). Nursing in a transformed health care system: New roles, new rules. In Interdisciplinary nurs- ing quality research initiative (pp. 1–10). Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
Hamric, A. B. (1992). Creating our future: Challenges and oppor- tunities for the clinical nurse specialist. Oncology Nursing Forum, 19(Suppl. 1), 11–15. [Classic]
Hassani, P., Abdi, A., & Jalali, R. (2016). State of science, “intuition in nursing practice”: A systematic review study. Journal of Clinical & Diagnostic Research, 10(2), JE07–JE11.
HealthCare.gov. (2012, August 20). Accountable care organizations: Improv- ing care coordination for people with Medicare. http://www.healthcare
.gov/news/factsheets/2011/03/accountablecare03312011a.html.
Heath, S. (2017, September 12). What is the patient activation measure in patient centered care? Patient Engagement HIT. https://patientengagementhit.com/news/what-is-the-patient- activation-measure-in-patient-centered-care
Hellwig, S. D., Yam, M., & DiGiulio, M. (2003). Nurse case manag- ers’ perceptions of advocacy. Lippincott’s Case Management, 8(2), 53–63.



Hibbard, J. H., Stockard, J., Mahoney, E. R., & Tusler, M. (2004). Development of the patient activation measure (PAM): Conceptu- alizing and measuring activation in patients and consumers. Health Service Research, 39(4, Pt. 1), 1005–1026. [Classic]
Hirschman, K. B., Shaid, E., McCauley, K., Pauly, M. V., & Naylor,
M. D. (2015, September 30). Continuity of care: fte transitional care model. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 20(3), 1. https:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
Home Health Care, Progress and Impediments (1983, March 16). Hearing Before Subcommittee on Health and Long Term Care of the Select Committee on Aging, House of Representatives, Ninety-eighth Congress, First Session, 7-10. [Classic]
Howe, R. (2005). Performance measurement for case management: Principles and objectives for developing standard measures. The Case Manager, 16(5), 52–56.
Huber, D. L. (2000). fte diversity of case management models. Case Management, 5(6), 248–255.
Intagliata, J. (1982). Improving the quality of community care for the chronically mentally disabled: fte role of case management. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 8(4), 655–674. [Classic]
Iowa Interventions and Outcomes Project. (2002). Nursing interven- tions classification. http://www.nursing.uiowa.edu/centers/cncce/nic
/nicquestions.htm
Jacoby, K., & McCabe, J. (2011). Oncology case management: Spe- cialized program addresses emerging needs in a managed care orga- nization. CMSA Today (4), 20–23.
Kelley, T. (2014). Population care coordinators: A key to improved care at lower cost. Managed Care Magazine. https://www
.managedcaremag.com
Kersbergen, A. L. (1996). Case management: A rich history of coor- dinating care to control costs. Nursing Outlook, 44(4), 169–172. [Classic]
Knollmueller, R. N. (1989). Case management: What’s in a name?
Nursing Management, 20(10), 38–42.
Krichbaum, K. (1999). Advanced practice nurse case managers and care pathways. In M. Snyder & M. P. Mirr (Eds.), Advanced practice nursing: A guide to professional development (2nd ed., pp. 99–116). Springer. [Classic]
Lamb, G. S. (1992). Conceptual and methodological issues: Nursing case management research. Advances in Nursing Science, 15(2), 16–24. [Classic]
Lamb, G. S. (1995). Case management. Annual Review of Nursing Re- search, 13, 117–136. [Classic]
Mahn, V. A., & Spross, J. A. (1996). Nurse case management as an advanced practice role. In A. B. Hamric, J. A. Spross, &
C. M. Hanson (Eds.), Advanced nursing practice: An integrative ap- proach (pp. 445–465). W. B. Saunders.
Mahn, V. A., & Zazworsky, D. (2000). Nurse case management as an advanced practice role. In A. B. Hamric, J. A. Spross, &
C. M. Hanson (Eds.), The advanced practice nurse case manager: An integrative approach (2nd ed., pp. 549–606). W. B. Saunders.

Maravankin, O. (2019, January 29). Why you should cultivate your in- tuition.  Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbescoachescouncil,
/2019/01/29/why-you-should-cultivate-your-intuition 
/#5335c7646b35
Marx, E. (2015). Edge runners, living independently for elders center,
American Academy of Nursing. https://www.aannet.org.
Medbridge Education (Producer). (2020). Responding to the COVID-19 pandemic: A panel discussion with home health leaders [Webinar]. http://medbridgeeducation.com
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing— Preparing people for change (2nd ed.). Guilford Press. [Classic]
Mollica, R. L., & Gillespie, J. (2003). Care coordination for people with chronic conditions: Partnership for solutions. Johns Hopkins University. [Classic]
More, P. K., & Mandell, S. (1997). Nursing case management: An evolv- ing practice. McGraw-Hill. [Classic]
Mundt, M. H. (1996). Key elements of nurse case management in curricula. In E. L. Cohen (Ed.), Nurse case management in the 21st century (pp. 48–54). Mosby. [Classic]
Naylor, M. D., Aiken, L. H., Kurtzman, E. T., Olds, D. M., & Hirschman, K. B. (2011, April). fte care span: fte importance of transitional care in achieving health reform. Health Affairs (Mill- wood), 30(4), 746–754. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
Naylor, M., Brooten, D., Campbell, R., Jacobsen, B. S., Mezey, M. D., Pauly, M., & Schwartz, J. S. (2010). Comprehensive discharge planning and home follow-up of hospitalized elders. Journal of the American Medical Association, 28(7), 613–620. [Classic]
Naylor, M., & Kurtzman, E. (2010). fte role of nurse practitioners in reinventing primary care. Health Affairs, 29(5), 893–899. [Classic]
Paez, K. A., & Allen, J. K. (2006). Cost effectiveness of nurse prac- titioner management of hypercholesterolemia following coronary revascularization. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practi- tioners, 18(9), 436–445.
Palmer, R. E. (1969). Hermeneutics. Northwestern University Press. [Classic]
Pfaff, L. (2020). Q&A with Health Commissioner Judith Persichilli: How NJ is responding to COVID-19. New Jersey Monthly. https:// njmonthly.com
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. (2020, August 5). Obituary, Dr. Ronald Vincent     Krak.   https://classmart.post-gazett.com/pa/obituaries
   /dr.-ronald-krak-on-wed/AC1EO53D141900C35EteG7DD47B7 Powell, S. K. (2000). Case management: A practice guide to success in
managed care. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. [Classic]
Powell, S. K. (2008, July/August). Intuition: Believe it or not . . . but place it in your toolbox [Editorial]. Professional Case Management, 13(4), 191–192.
Powell, S. K., & Ignatavicius, D. (2001). Core curriculum for case man- agement. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Profession of Promoting Health. (1919). Public Health Nurse, 11(1), 10–12. [Classic]



Purath, J., Keck, A., & Fitzgerald, C. E., (2014). Motivational inter- viewing for older adults in primary care: A systematic review. Geri- atric Nursing, 35(3), 219–224.
Reverby, S. M. (1987). Ordered to care: The dilemma of American nurs- ing, 1850–1945. Cambridge University Press. [Classic]
Shonick, W. (1988). Public health services: Background and present status. In S. J. Williams & P. R. Torrens (Eds.), Introduction to health services (3rd ed., pp. 85–123). Delmar. [Classic]
Sinnen, M., & Schifalaqua, M. (1996). fte education of nurses: Nurse case managers’ view. In E. L. Cohen (Ed.), Nurse case management in the 21st century (pp. 55–62). Mosby. [Classic]
Sowell, R. L., & Young, S. W. (1997). Case management in nursing curriculum. Nursing Care Management, 2(4), 173–176. [Classic]
Spencer, J. C., & Wheeler, S. B. (2016). A systematic review of motiva- tional interviewing interventions in cancer patients and survivors. Patient Education and Counseling, 99(7), 1099–1105.
Stanton, M. P., Swanson, M., Sherrod, R. A., & Packa, D. R. (2005). Case management evolution: From basic to advanced practice role. Lippincott’s Case Management, 10(6), 274–284. [Classic]
Stempel, J., Doerge, J., Van Mie, K., & Combs, J. (1997). Nurse case management. In B. Case (Ed.), Career planning for nurses (pp. 133–160). Delmar. [Classic]
Stuart, B., Mahler, E., & Komson, P. (2019, June). Large-scale advanced illness intervention informs Medicare’s new serious illness pay- ment model. Health Affairs, 38(6), 950–956. https://healthaffairs
.org; https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2018.05517
Tahan, H. A. (1998). Case management: A heritage more than a cen- tury old. Nursing Case Management, 3(2), 55–60. [Classic]
Tahan, H. A. (2020). Essential case management practices amidst the novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) crisis: Part 1. Profes- sional Case Management. https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
Tahan, H. A., & Campagna, V. (2010, September–October). Case management roles and functions across various settings and profes- sional disciplines. Professional Case Management, 15(5), 245–277.
Tahan, H. A., & Huber, D. L. (2006). fte CCMC’s national study of case manager job descriptions. Lippincott’s Case Management, 11(3), 127–144. [Classic]
Tahan, H. M., & Treiger, T. M. (2017). CMSA core curriculum for case management (3rd ed.). Wolters Kluwer.
Umbrell, C. E. (2006). Trauma case management: A role for the ad- vanced practice nurse. Journal of Trauma Nursing, 13(2), 70–73. [Classic]
Wald, L. D. (1915). The house on Henry Street. Henry Holt & Co. [Classic]
Watson, A. C. (2011, March/April). Finding common ground in case management: New titles and terminology along the healthcare continuum. Professional Case Management, 16(2), 52–54.
Watts, S. A., Gee, J., O’Day, M. E., Schaub, K., Lawrence, R., Aron, D., & Kirsh, S. (2009). Nurse practitioner-led multidisciplinary teams to improve chronic illness care: fte unique strengths of nurse practi- tioners applied to shared medical appointments/group visits. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 21, 167–172. [Classic]

Weil, M., & Karls, J. (1985). Historical origins and recent develop- ments in case management. In Weil, M. (Ed.), Case management in human service practice. Jossey-Bass. [Classic]
Welsh, I., & Lyons, C. M. (2001). Evidence-based care and the case for intuition and tacit knowledge in clinical assessment and decision making in mental health nursing practice: An empirical contribu- tion to the debate. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nurs- ing, 8(4), 299–305.
White, A. B. (2004). Case management and the national quality agenda: Partnering to improve the quality of care. Lippincott’s Case Management, 9(3), 132–140. [Classic]
Wong, E. (2008, October 24). Coining and defining novel nursing terminology. Part 2: Critical incident nursing intervention. Inter- national Journal of Nursing Terminologies and Classifications, 19(4), 132–139. [Classic]
Zander, K. (2008). Hospital case management models. HCPro, Inc. Zerwekh, J. V. (1992). Public health nursing legacy: Historical practi-
cal wisdom. Nursing and Health Care, 13(2), 84–91. [Classic]

CHAPTER 16
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2012). American Associa- tion of Nurse Practitioners network for research. https://pbrn.ahrq.gov
/pbrn-registry/american-association-nurse-practitioners-network- research
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2006). The essentials of doctoral education for advanced nursing practice. http://www.aacn
.nche.edu/DNP/pdf/Essentials.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2011). The essentials of master’s education in nursing.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2015). The doctor of nursing practice: Current issues and clarifying recommendations. Report from the Task Force on Implementation of the DNP. http://www.aacn.nche.edu/aacn-publications/white-papers/DNP- Implementation-TF-Report-8-15.pdf
American Association of Critical-Care Nurses Beacon Award for Excel- lence. (2019). https://www.aacn.org/nursing-excellence/beacon- awards
American Association of Nurse Practitioners Network for Research. (2020). Research opportunities for NPs. https://www.aanp.org/about
/research-opportunities
American Nurses Association. (2015). Nursing: Scope and standards of practice (3rd ed.).
American Nurses Credentialing Center Magnet Recognition Program. (2011). http://nursecredentialing.org/Magnet.aspx
Blevins, C., & DeGennaro, R. (2018). Educational intervention to im- prove delirium recognition by nurses. American Journal of Critical Care, 27(4), 270–278.
Blonde L., Khunti, K., Harris, S., Meizinger, C., & Skolnik, N. (2018). Interpretation and impact of real-world clinical data for the practicing clinician. Advances in Therapy, 35(11), 1763–1774.
Bryant-Lukosius, D., Spichiger, E., Martin, J., Stoll, H., Kellerhals, S. D., Fliedner, M., Grossman, F., Henry, M., Herrmann, L., Koller, A.,



Schwendimann, R., Ulrich, A., Weibel, L., Callens, B., & DeGeest, S. (2016). Framework for evaluating the impact of advanced practice nursing roles. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 48(2), 201–209.
Burns, S. M. (2010, May 1). A journey to make research part of what we do: From inception to success. HCPro’s Advisor to the ANCC Magnet Recognition Program, 6(5). [Classic]
Cacchione, P. (2019). Special issue: Nursing research advancing cardiac care. Clinical Nursing Research, 28(2), 127–129.
Chulay, M. (2006). Good research ideas for clinicians. AACN Ad- vanced Critical Care, 17, 253–265. [Classic]
Deivert, M., Quatrara, B., Kane, C., Sohn, M., Bowles, M., & Turren- tine, F. (2019). An evaluation of risk factor for extubation failure in surgical patients in intensive care. Dimensions of Critical Care Nursing, 38(5), 256–263.
De Palma, J. A. (2009). Research. In A. B. Hamric, J. A. Spross, &
C. M. Hanson (Eds.), Advanced nursing practice: An integrative approach (4th ed., pp. 217–248). Saunders. [Classic]
Duffy, J., Culp, S., Sand-Jecklin, K., Stroupe, L., & Lucke-Wold, N. (2016). Nurses’ research capacity, use of evidence, and research productivity in acute care: Year 1 findings from a partnership study. Journal of Nursing Administration, 46(1), 12–17.
Duffy, J., Culp, S., Yarberry, C., Stroupe, L., Sand-Jecklin, K., & Coburn, A. (2015). Nurses’ research capacity and use of evidence in acute care. Journal of Nursing Administration, 45(3), 158–164.
Farmer, L., Winfield, C., Quatrara, B., Letzkus, L., Schenck, P., Finnernan, P., Pollack, D., McCaskill, C., Nealy, R., & Conaway, M. (2017). Does site matter? Comparing patient comfort and accuracy of blood glucose samples taken from the finger and palm of adult diabetic patients in the preoperative setting. Journal of PeriAnesthe- sia Nursing, 32(6), 573–577.
Fran, M., & O’Grady, E. (2018). Hamric and Hanson’s Advanced prac- tice nursing: An integrative approach (6th ed.). Saunders.
Gawlinski, A., & Miller, P. S. (2011, July–September). Advancing nursing research through a mentorship program for staff nurses. AACN Advances in Critical Care, 22(3), 190–200. [Classic]
Gettrust, L., Hagle, M., Boaz, L., & Bull, M. (2016). Engaging nurs- ing staff in research. Clinical Nurse Specialist: The Journal for Ad- vanced Nursing Practice, 30(4), 203–207.
Hill, K. (2020). Creating cultures supporting research. Journal of Nurs- ing Administration, 50(5), 241–242.
Johantgen, M., Weiss, M., Lundmark, V., Newhouse, R., Haller, K., Unruh, L., & Shirey, M. (2017). Building research infrastructure in Magnet hospitals: Current status and future directions. The Jour- nal of Nursing Administration, 47(4), 198–204.
Kok, N., Ligthart-Beukhof, A. C., & van de Wetering, M. D. (2019). Chemotherapy intravenously in children with cancer at home, the nurse practitioner makes it possible! Supportive Care in Can- cer: Official Journal of the Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer, 27(12), 4389–4391. https://doi.org/10.1007
/s00520-019-05053-z
Leach, M., & Tucker, B. (2018). Current understandings of the research-practice gap in nursing: A mixed-methods study. Colle- gian, 25(2), 171–179.

Leske, J. (2007). Roles for the advanced practice nurse in nursing re- search. Perioperative Nursing Clinics, 2(1), 37–45. [Classic]
Letzkus, L., Steck, S., Miller-Davis, E., Conaway, M., & Quatrara, B. (2020). Picking up the pace: Decreasing platelet administration safely and effectively. Journal of Pediatric Nursing, 52, 1–4.
Makic, M., & Rauen, C. (2016). Maintaining your momentum: Mov- ing evidence into practice. American Association of Critical Care Nurses, 36(2), 13–18.
Melnyk, B., Fineout-Overholt, E., Gallagher-Ford, L., & Kaplan, L. (2012). fte state of evidence-based practice in US nurses: Critical implications for nurse leaders and educators. Journal of Nursing Ad- ministration, 42(9), 410–417. [Classic]
Migliore, L., Chouinard, H., & Woodlee, R. (2020). Clinical research and practice collaborative: An evidence-based nursing clinical in- quiry expansion. Medicine, 185(2), 35–42.
Quatrara, B., Rea, K., Wilkins, K., & Facteau, L. (2017). Partnering to improve outcomes: fte nurse executive and the clinical nurse specialist. Nurse Leader, 15(1), 61–64.
Solomon, R., & Jurica, K. (2017). Closing the research-practice gap: Increasing evidence-based practice for nasogastric tube insertion using education and an electronic order set. Journal of Emergency Nursing, 43(2), 133–137.
Steele-Moses, S. K. (2010). fte journey to Magnet: Developing a research infrastructure. Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing, 14, 237–239. [Classic]
fteile, R. H., Rea, K. M., Turrentine, E., Friel, C. M., Hassinger, T. E.,
McMurry, T. L., Goudreau, B. J., Umapathi, B. A., Kron, I. L., Sawyer, R. G., & Hedrick, T. L. (2015). Standardization of care: Impact of an enhanced recovery protocol on length of stay, com- plications, and direct costs after colorectal surgery. Journal of the American College of Surgeons, 220(5), 430–443.
Tracy, M., & O’Grady, E. (2019). Hamric and Hanson’s advanced prac- tice nursing (6th ed.). Elsevier.
Unertl, K., Fair, A., Favours, J., Dolor,R., Smoot, D., & Wilkins, C. (2018). Clinicians’ perspectives on and interest in participating in a clinical data research network across the Southeastern United States. BMC Health Services Research, 18, 568.
Whitehouse, C., Long, J., Maloney, L., Daniels, K., Horowitz, D., & Bowles, K. (2020). Feasibility of diabetes self-management tele- health education for older adults during transitions in care. Re- search in Gerontological Nursing, 13(3), 138–145.

CHAPTER 17
Alarcao, Z., & Fonseca, J. R. S. (2016). fte effects of Reiki therapy on quality of life of patients with blood cancer results from a ran- domized control trial. European Journal of Integrative Medicine (8), 239–249.
American Holistic Nurses Association. (2002). AHNA standards of ad- vanced holistic nursing practice for graduate-prepared nurses.
American Holistic Nurses Association. (2016, July 19). AHNA: Position on the role of nurses in the practice of complementary and integrative health approaches. Used by permission prior to publication on Web site.



American Nurses Association. (2010). Nursing’s social policy statement: The essence of the profession. Revised.
American Nurses Association. (2015). Code of ethics for nurses with in- terpretative statements.
American Nurses Association & American Holistic Nurses Association. (2007). Holistic nursing: Scope and standards of practice (1st ed.).
American Nurses Association & American Holistic Nurses Association. (2019). Holistic nursing: Scope and standards of practice (3rd ed.).
Ashen, A. (1977, Spring). Eidetics: An overview. Journal of Mental Im- agery, 1, 5–38.
Atkinson, C. F. (2019) Blessing: A practice of presence, intentionality, and appreciation. Journal of Holistic Nursing, 38(1), 158–162.
Aveno, K. M. (2016). Advancing integrative health & well-being prac- tice. In B. Dossey & L. Keegan (Eds.), Holistic nursing: A handbook for practice (7th ed., pp. 815–898). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Ayan, M., Tas, U., Sogut, E., Suren, M., Gurbuzler, L., & Koyuncu, F. (2013). Investigating the effects of aromatherapy in patients with renal colic. Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 9(4), 329–333.
Bach, D., Groesbeck, G., Stapleton, P., Sims, R., Blickheuser, K., & Church, D. (2019, January–December). Clinical EFT improves multiple physiological markers of health. Journal of Evidence Based Integrative Medicine, 24.
Baldacchino, D., & Draper, P. (2001). Spiritual coping strategies: A review of the nursing research literature. Journal of Advanced Nurs- ing, 34(6), 833–841.
Baldwin, A. L., Vitale, A., Brownell, E., Kryak, E., & Rand, W. (2017) Effects of Reiki on pain, anxiety and BP in patients undergoing knee replacement surgery. Holistic Nursing Practice, 31(2), 80–89.
Baldwin, A. L., Vitale, A., Brownell, E., Scicinski, J., Kearns, M., & Rand, W. (2010). fte touchstone process: An ongoing criti- cal evaluation of Reiki in the scientific literature. Holistic Nursing Practice, 24(5), 260–276.
Bennett, M. (2015). It’s about resilience! Beginnings, 35(6), 9–6,
26–27.
Billquist, E., Michelfelder, A., Brincat, C., Brubaker, L., Fitzgerald,
C. M., & Mueller, E. R. (2018). Pre-operative guided imagery in female pelvic medicine and reconstructive surgery: A randomized trial. International Urogynecology Journal, 29, 1117–1122.
Bodenheimer, T., & Simsky, C. (2014). From triple to quadruple aim: Care of the patient requires care of the provider. The Annals of Fam- ily Medicine, 12, 573–576.
Buckle, J. (2015). Clinical aromatherapy: Essential oils in health care
(3rd ed.). Elsevier.
Buckle, J. (2016). Aromatherapy. In B. Dossey, L. Keegan, &
K. Guzetta (Eds.), Holistic nursing: A handbook for practice (7th ed., pp. 345–363). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Burkhardt, M. A., & Nagai-Jacobson, M. G. (2002). Spirituality: Liv- ing our connectedness. Delmar ftompson Learning.
Burkhardt, M. A., & Nagai-Jacobson, M. G. (2015). Spirituality and health. In B. Dossey, L. Keegan, & L. Keegan (Eds.), Holistic

nursing: A handbook for practice (7th ed., pp, 135–163). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Canella, L., Bowen, C., Coplan, D., Nteff, D., & Barnes, K. (2012). Examination of the effectiveness of peppermint aromatherapy on nausea in women post C-section. Journal of Holistic Nursing, 30(2), 90–91, 104.
Case, K. H. (2015). Our spaces build us. Beginnings, 35(6), 18–20. Case, K., Jackson, P., Kinkel, R., & Mills, P. J. (2018). Guided im-
agery improves mood, fatigue, and quality of life in individuals
with multiple sclerosis: An exploratory efficacy trial of healing light guided imagery. Journal of Evidence-Based Integrative Medicine, 23, 12–21.
Chin, K. B., & Cordell, B. (2013). fte effects of tea tree oil (Melaleuca alternifolia) on wound healing using a dressing model. Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 9(12), 942–945.
Chirico, A. (2017). Self efficacy for coping with cancer enhances the effect of Reiki treatments during the pre-surgery phase of breast cancer patients. Anticancer Research, 37(7), 3657–3665.
Church, D., Yount, G., Rachlin, K., Fox, L., & Nelms, J. (2018). Epi- genetic effects of PTSD remediation in veterans using clinical emo- tional freedom techniques: A randomized controlled pilot study. American Journal of Health Promotion, 32(1), 112–122.
Clark, C. C. (1986). Wellness nursing: Concepts, theory, research and practice. Springer.
Clements, I., & Martin, E. J. (1990). Nursing and holistic wellness: A new beginning. Kendall/Hunt Publishing.
Coalition to Transform Advanced Care. (2015). A roadmap for success: Transforming advanced illness care in America. fte C-TAC Orga- nization. http://www.thectac.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/ Roadmap-Kindle-.pdf
Coppa, D. (2008). fte internal process of therapeutic touch. Journal of Holistic Nursing, 26(1), 17–24.
Decker, S., Wardell, D. W., & Cron, S. G. (2012). Using a healing touch intervention in older adults with persistent pain: A feasibility study. Journal of Holistic Nursing, 30(3), 205–213.
Delgado-Guay, M. (2018). Developing a healing environment for broken souls of patients with life-threatening illnesses and their caregivers. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 55(4), 1231–1236.
Denner, S. S. (2007). fte advanced practice nurse and integration of complementary and alternative medicine. Holistic Nursing Practice, 21(3), 152–159.
Denner, S. S. (2009). fte science of energy therapies and contempla- tive practice. Holistic Nursing Practice, 23(6), 315–334.
Depro, T. (2019). Patients still not telling MDs about use of natural health products. Brighter World. https://brighterworld.mcmaster
.ca/articles/patients-still-not-telling-mds-about-use-of-natural- health-products/
Donner, G., & Wheeler, M. (2009). Coaching in nursing: An intro- duction. International Council of Nursing and Sigma fteta Tau. http://www.donnerwheeler.com/documents/STTICoaching.pdf



Dossey, B. M. (1997). Core curriculum for holistic nursing. Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Dossey, B. M. (2015). fteory of integrative nurse coaching. In
B. M. Dossey, S. Luck, & B. G. Schaub (Eds.), Integrative ap- proaches for health and wellbeing. International Nurse Coach Association.
Dossey, B. M., & Keegan, L. (2016). Holistic nursing: A handbook for practice (7th ed.). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Dossey, B. M., & Luck, S. (2015). Nurse coaching through a nursing lens: fte theory of integrative nurse coaching. Beginnings, 35(4), 10–13, 25.
Drick, C. A. (2015). fte essence of spirituality—Coming alive in pres- ence. Beginnings, 35(5), 14–16.
Drick, C. A. (2016a, September/October). Caring for the care giver: Ensuring 360 through centering. In The American Nurse: The Official Publication of the American Nurses Association. American Nurses Association. [Prepublication copy]
Drick, C. A. (2016b). Self care: A busy person’s guide for finding time and balance. Beginnings, 36(4), 6–7, 32.
Drick, C. A. (2020). Finding our true north: fte future of holistic nursing. Beginnings. 40(1), 14–15.
DuBose, J., MacAllister, L., & Hadi, K. (2018). Exploring the concept of healing spaces. HERD: Health Environments, Research & Designs, 11(1), 43–56.
Eisenberg, D. M., Kessler, R. C., Foster, C., Norlock, F. E., Calkins,
D. R., & Delbanco, T. L. (1993). Unconventional medicine in the United States: Prevalence, costs, and patterns of use. New England Journal of Medicine, 328(4), 246–252.
Eldridge, C. R. (2007). Meeting your patients’ spiritual needs. Ameri- can Nurse Today, 2(10), 51–52.
Engebretson, J., & Wardell, D. W. (2007). Energy-based modalities.
Nursing Clinics of North America, 41(2), 243–260.
Erickson, H. L. (2007). Philosophy and theory of holism. Nursing Clinics of North America, 41(2), 139–163.
Erickson, M., & Sandor, K. (2016). Advanced holistic nursing certifi- cation: What it means and why it’s important. Beginnings, 36(3), 18–20.
Fairman, J. A., Rowe, J., Hassmiller, S., & Shalala, D. (2011). Broad- ening the scope of nursing practice. New England Journal of Medi- cine, 364(3), 193–196.
Fitzgerald, M. A. (2007, December). Herbal facts, herbal fallacies.
American  Nurse Today,  2(12). https://www.americannursetoday
.com/herbal-facts-herbal-fallacies/
Floriani, C. (2016). Anthroposophy and integrative care at the end of life. Alternative and Complementary Therapies, 22(3), 99–104. http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/full/10.1089/act.2016.29055.caf
Fowler, M. (2015). Guide to nursing’s social policy statement: Under- standing the profession from social contract to social covenant. Ameri- can Nurses Association.
Fung, J. K., Tsang, H. W., & Chung, R. C. (2012). A systematic review of the use of aromatherapy in treatment of behavioral problems

in dementia. Geriatrics and Gerontology International, 12(3), 272–282.
Garner, B. (2007). Aromatherapy for you and your patient. American Nurse Today, 2(9), 53–54.
Giacobbi, P., Jr., Long, D., Nolan, R., Shawley, S., Johnson, K., & Misra, R. (2018). Guided imagery targeting exercise, food cravings and stress: A multi-modal randomized feasibility trial. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 41(1), 87–98.
Hart, J. (2016). Chronic pain, addiction and complementary thera- pies. Alternative and Complementary Therapies, 22(3), 117–119.
Heisenberg, W. (1958). Physics and philosophy: The revolution in mod- ern science. Harper & Row.
Herdman, T. H., & Kamitsuru, S., (2018). NANDA international nurs- ing diagnosis: Definitions and classification 2018–2020 (11th ed.,
p. 225). ftieme Medical Publishers.
Hess, D. (2011). Defining holistic coaching. Beginnings, 31, 16–19.
Hines, M. E. (2016). Turning words into action: fte emerging role of advanced holistic nurses. Beginnings, 36(3), 6–7, 32–33.
Hines, M. E., & McCaffrey, R. (2016). Envisioning advanced practice holistic nursing in the future. Beginnings, 36(3), 16–17.
Hoge, E. A., Bui, E., Palitz, S. A., Schwarz, N. R., Owens, M. E., Johnson, J. M., Pollack, M. H., & Simon, N. M. (2018, April). fte effect of mindfulness meditation training on biological acute stress responses in generalized anxiety disorder. Psychiatry Research, 262, 328–332.
Institute of Medicine. (2014). Dying in America: Improving quality and honoring individual preferences near the end of life. National Acad- emies Press.
Jonas, W. B. (1997). Alternative medicine: Editorial. Journal of Family Practice, 45(1), 34.
Keegan, L., & Drick, C. A. (2011). End of life: Nursing solutions for death with dignity. Springer.
Keegan, L., & Drick, C. A. (2013). The golden room: A practical guide for death with dignity. Create Space.
Kemper, K. (2016). Authentic healing: Effects on recipients and heal- ers. Alternative and Complementary Therapies, 22(3), 105–110.
Koenig, A. (2015). Embracing our connection to nature: Nurses as advocates for our health and food system. Beginnings, 35(6), 10–13.
Kubsch, S., O’Shaughnessy, J., Carrick, J., Willihnganz, T., Henricks-Soderberg, L., & Sloan, S. A. (2007). Acceptance of change in the healthcare paradigm from reductionism to holism. Holistic Nursing Practice, 21(3), 140–151.
Madrid, M. M., Barrett, E. A. M., & Winstead-Fry, P. (2010). A study of the feasibility of introducing therapeutic touch into the opera- tive environment with patients undergoing cerebral angiography. Journal of Holistic Nursing, 28(3), 168–174.
McCloskey, J. C., & Bulechek, G. M. (1992). Nursing interventions classification. Mosby.
McCloskey, J. C., & Bulechek, G. M. (2000). Nursing interventions classification (3rd ed.). Mosby.



McElligott, D. (2016). Nurse coaching presents new opportunities for advanced practice nurses. Beginnings, 36(3), 25–26.
Midilli,T. S., & Gunduzoglu, N. C. (2016). Effects of Reiki on pain and vital signs when applied to the incision area of the body af- ter cesearean section surgery. Holistic Nursing Practice, 30(6), 368–378.
National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine. (2016a). Complementary, alternative or integrative health: What’s in a name? https://nccih.nih.gov/health/integrative-health
National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine. (2016b). Exploring the science of complementary and integrative health: Fourth strategic plan 2016–2020. https://nccih.nih.gov
/about/strategic-plans/2016
Nightingale, F. (1859/1969). Notes on nursing. Dover Publishing. Novelli, B., Koutsoumpas, T., & Workman, B. (Eds.). (2015). A road-
map for success: Transforming advanced illness care in America. Coa-
lition to Transform Advanced Care.
Patterson, S. L. (2016, May). fte effect of emotional freedom tech- nique on stress and anxiety in nursing students: A pilot study. Nurse Education Today, 40, 104–110.
Peters, R. M. (1999). fte effectiveness of therapeutic touch: A meta-analytic review. Nursing Science Quarterly, 12(1), 52–61.
Purnell, M. J., & Lange, B. (2011). Creating a graduate holistic nurs- ing program. Holistic Nursing Practice, 25(3), 140–146.
Radzyminski, S. (2007). Legal parameters of alternative-complemen- tary modalities in nursing practice. Nursing Clinics of North Amer- ica, 41(2), 189–212.
Rakel, D. (2007). Integrative medicine (2nd ed.). W. B. Saunders. Reid, A. (2015). Holistic nursing, Reiki and the gentle art of beekeep-
ing. Beginnings, 35(6), 22–24.
Reit, P., Jitsacorn, C., Junlapeeya, P., & ftursby, P. (2017, December). Student nurses experience of a “fairy garden” healing haven garden for sick children. Nursing Education Today, 59, 88–93.
Rew, L. (1996). Awareness in healing. Delmar Publishers.
Rosa, W., & Lubansky, S. (2016). fte advanced practice holistic nurse: A leader in the implementation of core values. Beginnings, 36(3), 10–12.
Schaub, B. G., & White, M. B. (2015). Transpersonal coaching.
Beginnings, 35(4), 14–16.
Schultz, E., & Loen, M. (2015). Pilgrimage as a spiritual experience.
Beginnings, 35(5), 18–19, 28.
Shames, K. H. (1996). Creative imagery in nursing. Delmar Publishers. Sherry, E., & Warnke, P. (2002, February 13–17). Alternative for MRSA and tuberculosis: Eucalyptus and tea tree oils as new topical antibacterials
[Paper presentation]. Orthopedic Surgery Conference, Dallas, TX.
Shields, D. (2015). My earth . . . my footprint . . . my heartvoice.
Beginnings, 35(6), 14–17.
Shields, D., & Weaver, D. (2016). Essentials . . . credentials . . . con- sensus . . . o my! Creating holistic graduate nursing curriculum. Beginnings, 36(3), 8–9, 22–23.

Shields, D. A., & Wilson, D. R. (2016). Energy healing. In
B. Dossey & L. Keegan (Eds.), Holistic nursing: A handbook for practice (7th ed., pp. 204–206). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Smith, M. (2019). Nursing theories & nursing practice (5th ed.). F.A. Davis.
Snyder, M. (1985). Independent nursing interventions. John Wiley & Sons.
Southard, M. E. (2015). fte nuances of cultural diversity in coaching.
Beginnings, 35(4), 22–23.
Stuart-Mullen, L., Cutshall, S., Wentworth, L., & Loth, A. (2015). Bringing nurse coaching to a cardiovascular health clinic. Begin- nings, 35(4), 6–9.
Tang, R., Tegeler, C., Larrimore, D., Cowgill, S., & Kemper, K. (2010). Improving the well-being of nursing leaders through heal- ing touch training. The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 16(8), 837–841.
ftompson, M. (1949). The cry and the covenant. Doubleday. Tisserand, R., & Young, R. (2014). Essential oil safety. Churchill
Livingstone.
United States Department of Health and Human Services. (1998). Healthy People 2010 objectives: Draft for public comment. Govern- ment Printing Office.
Wampold, B. E., (2018). fte therapeutic value of the relationship for placebo effects and other healing practices. International Review of Neurobiology, 139,191–210.
Wardell, D. W., & Weymouth, K. (2004). Review of studies of healing touch. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 36(2), 147–154.
Watts, A. (1960). The nature of consciousness. https://www.youtube
.com/watch?v=BdKiphL35j0
Winstead-Fry, P., & Wijeck, J. (1999). An interpretative review and meta-analysis of therapeutic touch research. Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine, 5(6), 58–67.
Wylie, N. (2016). Implementing integrative care as a DNP to increase patient health outcomes. Beginnings, 36(3), 14–15.
Zahourek, R. P. (1982a). Hypnosis in nursing practice—Emphasis on the problem patient who has pain [Part 1]. Journal of Psychosocial Nursing and Mental Health Services, 20(3), 13–17.
Zahourek, R. P. (1982b). Hypnosis in nursing practice—Emphasis on the problem patient who has pain [Part 2]. Journal of Psychosocial Nursing and Mental Health Services, 20(4), 21–24.
Zahourek, R. P. (1985). Clinical hypnosis and therapeutic suggestion in nursing. Grune & Stratton, Inc.
Zahourek, R. P. (1988). Relaxation and imagery: Tools for therapeutic communication and intervention. W. B. Saunders.
Zahourek, R. P. (2002). Imagery. In M. A. Bright (Ed.), Holistic health and healing. F.A. Davis.
Zahourek, R. P. (2009). Healing through the lens of intentionality. Inter- national Journal of Healing and Caring, 9(2). http://www.IJHC.org
Zeidan, F., Adler-Neal, A., Wells, R., Stagnaro, E., May, L. M., Eisenbach, J. C., McHaffie, J. G., & Coghill, R. C. (2016, March 16).



Mindfulness-meditation-based pain relief is not mediated by en- dogenous opioids. Journal of Neuroscience, 36(11), 3391–3397. https://nccih.nih.gov/research/results/spotlight/mindfulness- meditation-pain

CHAPTER 18
Aebersold, M. (2018). Simulation-based learning: No longer a novelty in undergraduate education. OJIN: The Online Jour- nal of Issues in Nursing, 23(2). https://doi.org/10.3912/OJIN
.Vol23No02PPT39
Altmiller, G., & Armstrong, G. (2017). 2017 National Quality and Safety Education for Nurses faculty survey results. Nurse Educator, 42, S3–S7. https://doi.org/10.1097/nne.0000000000000408
Anderson, L. W., & Krathwohl, D. R. (Eds.). (2001). A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives. Longman. [Classic]
Ashton, K., & Oermann, M. H. (2014). Patient education in home care: Strategies for success. Home Healthcare Nurse, 32, 288–294. https://doi.org/10.1097/NHH.0000000000000059
Bastable, S. B. (2019). Nurse as educator: Principles of teaching and learning for nursing practice (5th ed.). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Bloom, B. S., Englehart, M. D., Furst, E. J., Hill, W. H., & Krath- wohl, D. R. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives: The clas- sification of educational goals. Handbook I: Cognitive domain. Longman. [Classic]
Bowman, K. (2017). Use of online unfolding case studies to foster crit- ical thinking. Journal of Nursing Education, 56, 701–702. https:// doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20171020-13
Brega, A. G., Barnard, J., Mabachi, N. M., Weiss, B. D., DeWalt, D.
A., Brach, C., Cifuentes, M., Albright, K., & West, D. R. (2015). AHRQ health literacy universal precautions toolkit (2nd ed.). Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.  https://www.ahrq.gov/sites
/default/files/publications/files/healthlittoolkit2_4.pdf
Daraz, L., Morrow, A. S., Ponce, O. J., Beuschel, B., Farah, M. H., Katabi, A., Alsawas, M., Majzoub, A. M., Benkhadra, R., Seisa, M. O., Ding, J. F., Procop, L., & Murad, M. H. (2019). Can patients trust online health information? A meta-narrative systematic re- view addressing the quality of health information on the Internet. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 34(9), 1884–1891. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s11606-019-05109-0
Ding, X., Wang, L., Sun, J., Li, D. Y., Zheng, B-Y., He, S-W., Zhu,
L-H., & Latour, J. M. (2020). Effectiveness of empathy clinical ed- ucation for children’s nursing students: A quasi-experimental study. Nurse Education Today,  85, 104260. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.nedt.2019.104260
Dinkins, C., & Cangelosi, P. (2019). Putting Socrates back in Socratic method: fteory-based debriefing in the nursing classroom. Nurs- ing Philosophy, 20(2). https://doi.org/10.1111/nup.12240
Family Planning National Training Center. (2016). OARS Model: Essential communication skills. https://www.fpntc.org/sites/default
/files/resources/2017-10/fpntc_oars_model_2016.pdf [Classic]

Foronda, C. L., Fernandez-Burgos, M., Nadeau, C., Kelley, C. N., & Henry, M. N. (2020). Virtual simulation in nursing education: A systematic review spanning 1996 to 2018. Simulation in Health- care,  15,  46–54. https://doi.org/10.1097/sih.0000000000000411
Gelis, A., Cervello, S., Rey, R., Llorca, G., Lambert, P., Franck, N., Dupeyron, A., Delpont, M., & Rolland, B. (2020). Peer role-play for training communication skills in medical students: A system- atic review. Simulation in Healthcare, 15, 106–111. https://doi
.org/10.1097/sih.0000000000000412
Hensel, D., & Billings, D. M. (2019). Strategies to teach the National Council of State Boards of Nursing Clinical Judgment Model. Nurse Educator. https://doi.org/10.1097/nne.0000000000000773
Hong, S., & Yu, P. (2017). Comparison of the effectiveness of two styles of case-based learning implemented in lectures for develop- ing nursing students’ critical thinking ability: A randomized con- trolled trial. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 68, 16–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2016.12.008
Johnson, C. E., Kimble, L. P., Gunby, S. S., & Davis, A. H. (2019). Using deliberate practice and simulation for psy- chomotor skill competency acquisition and retention: A mixed-methods study. Nurse Educator. https://doi.org/10.1097
/nne.0000000000000713
Kardong-Edgren, S., Oermann, M. H., & Rizzolo, M. A. (2019). Emerging theories influencing the teaching of clinical nursing skills. Journal of Continuing Education in Nursing, 50, 257–262. https://doi.org/10.3928/00220124-20190516-05
Klingbeil, C., & Gibson, C. (2018). fte teach back project: A system-wide evidence based practice implementation. Journal of Pediatric Nursing, 42, 81–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pedn.2018.06.002
Kutner, M., Greenberg, E., Jin, Y., & Paulsen, C. (2006). The health lit- eracy of America’s adults: Results from the 2003 National Assessment of Adult Literacy (NCES 2006–483). U.S. Department of Education. National Center for Education Statistics. [Classic]
Labrague, L. J., McEnroe-Petitte, D. M., Bowling, A. M., Nwafor,
C. E., & Tsaras, K. (2019). High-fidelity simulation and nursing students’ anxiety and self-confidence: A systematic review. Nursing Forum, 54, 358–368. https://doi.org/10.1111/nuf.12337
Lapierre, A., Bouferguene, S., Gauvin-Lepage, J., Lavoie, P., & Arbour, C. (2020). Effectiveness of interprofessional manikin- based simulation training on teamwork among real teams during trauma resuscitation in adult emergency departments: A system- atic review. Simulation in Healthcare. https://doi.org/10.1097
/sih.0000000000000443
Lee, J., Kim, H., Kim, K. H., Jung, D., Jowsey, T., & Webster, C. (2020). Effective virtual patient simulators for medical commu- nication training: A systematic review. Medical Education. https:// doi.org/10.1111/medu.14152
Lee, J., Lee, H., Kim, S., Choi, M., Ko, I. S., Bae, J., & Kim, S. H.
(2020). Debriefing methods and learning outcomes in simula- tion nursing education: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Nurse Education Today,  87, 104345. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.nedt.2020.104345



Lewis, K. A., Ricks, T. N., Rowin, A., Ndlovu, C., Goldstein, L., & McElvogue, C. (2019). Does simulation training for acute care nurses improve patient safety outcomes: A systematic review to in- form evidence-based practice. Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nurs- ing, 16, 389–396. https://doi.org/10.1111/wvn.12396
Li, S., Ye, X., & Chen, W. (2019). Practice and effectiveness of “nurs- ing case-based learning” course on nursing student’s critical think- ing ability: A comparative study. Nurse Education in Practice, 36, 91–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nepr.2019.03.007
McCleary-Jones, V. (2016). A systematic review of the literature on health literacy in nursing education. Nurse Educator, 41, 93–97.
Moreau, K. A., Eady, K., Sikora, L., & Horsley, T. (2018). Digital storytelling in health professions education: A systematic review. BMC Medical Education, 18(1), 208. https://doi.org/10.1186
/s12909-018-1320-1
Muret-Wagstaff, S. L., Faber, D. A., Gamboa, A. C., & Lovasik, B. P. (2020). Increasing the effectiveness of “stop the bleed” training through stepwise mastery learning with deliberate practice. Journal of Surgical Education. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsurg.2020.03.001
Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2020). Social determinants of health. Healthy People 2020. U.S. Department of  Health  and  Human  Services.  https://www.healthypeople
    .gov/2020/topics-objectives/topic/social-determinants-of-health Oermann,  M.  H.  (2018).  Wanted:   Evidence to guide   clinical
teaching.  Nurse  Educator,  43,  223.  https://doi.org/10.1097
/nne.0000000000000594
Oermann, M. H., & Gaberson, K. (2021). Evaluation and testing in nursing education (6th ed.). Springer.
Oermann, M. H., Muckler, V. C., & Morgan, B. (2016). Framework for teaching psychomotor and procedural skills in nursing. Journal of Continuing Education in Nursing, 47, 278–282.
Oermann, M. H., Shellenbarger, T., & Gaberson, K. B. (2018). Clini- cal teaching strategies in nursing (5th ed.). Springer.
Palaganas, J. C., Fey, M., & Simon, R. (2016). Structured debriefing in simulation-based education. AACN Advanced Critical Care, 27(1), 78–85. https://doi.org/10.4037/aacnacc2016328
Schmidt, R. A., & Lee, T. D. (2005). Motor control and learning: A behavioral emphasis (4th ed.). Human Kinetics. [Classic]
Shellenbarger, T., & Robb, M. (2015). Technology-based strategies for promoting clinical reasoning skills in nursing education. Nurse Educator, 40, 79–82.
Sidhu, M. S., Gale, N. K., Gill, P., Marshall, T., & Jolly, K. (2015). A critique of the design, implementation, and delivery of a culturally-tailored self-management education intervention: A qualitative evaluation. BMC Health Services Research, 15, 54. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-015-0712-8
Smallheer, B. A. (2016). Reverse case study: A new perspective on an existing teaching strategy. Nurse Educator, 41, 7–8. https://doi.org
/10.1097/nne.0000000000000186
Tran, S., Bennett, G., Richmond, J., Nguyen, T., Ryan, M., Hong, T., Howell, J., Demediuk, B., Desmond, P., Bell, S., & ftompson, A. (2019). “Teach-back” is a simple communication tool that improves

disease knowledge in people with chronic hepatitis B—A pilot randomized controlled study. BMC Public Health, 19(1), 1355. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-019-7658-4
Vacek, J., & Liesveld, J. (2019). Teaching concepts to nursing students using model case studies, the Venn diagram, and questioning strat- egies. Nursing Education Perspectives. https://doi.org/10.1097/01
.Nep.0000000000000514
Welch, T., & Carter, M. (2018). Deliberate practice and skill acquisi- tion in nursing practice. Journal of Continuing Education in Nursing, 49, 269–273. https://doi.org/10.3928/00220124-20180517-07
Welvers, A., Rosenberger, K. D., & Corbridge, S. J. (2020). Health literacy assessment of detained individuals and correctional officers within a large urban jail: Optimizing health educa- tion. Journal of Nursing Care Quality. https://doi.org/10.1097
/ncq.0000000000000477
Woodring, B. C., & Hultquist, B. L. (2017). Using lecture in active classrooms. In M. J. Bradshaw & B. L. Hultquist (Eds.), Innovative teaching strategies in nursing and related health professions (7th ed., pp. 143–161). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Yeh, V. J., Sherwood, G., Durham, C. F., Kardong-Edgren, S., Schwartz, T. A., & Beeber, L. S. (2019). Designing and imple- menting asynchronous online deliberate practice to develop in- terprofessional communication competency. Nurse Education in Practice, 35, 21–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nepr.2018.12.011
Zook, S. S., Hulton, L. J., Dudding, C. C., Stewart, A. L., & Graham,
A. C. (2018). Scaffolding interprofessional education: Unfolding case studies, virtual world simulations, and patient-centered care. Nurse Ed- ucator,  43,  87–91. https://doi.org/10.1097/nne.0000000000000430

CHAPTER 19
About the Health Literacy Tool Shed. (2020). https://healthliteracy
.bu.edu/about
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (1998). Quality first: Bet- ter health care for all Americans, report of the Presidential Advisory Commission on Consumer Protection and Quality in the Health Care Industry. http://archive.ahrq.gov/hcqual/final/
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2016a). National health- care quality and disparities report chartbook on access to health care (AHRQ  Publication  No.  16-0015-5-EF). https://www.ahrq.gov
/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/research/findings/nhqrdr/chartbooks
/access/qdr2015-chartbook-access.pdf
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2016b). National health- care quality and disparities report chartbook on care affordability (AHRQ  Publication  No.  16-0015-7-EF). https://www.ahrq.gov
/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/research/findings/nhqrdr/chartbooks
   /careaffordability/qdr2015-chartbook-careaffordability.pdf Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2016c). The national
quality strategy: Fact sheet [Content last reviewed November 2016].
https://www.ahrq.gov/workingforquality/about/nqs-fact-sheets
/fact-sheet.html
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2017a). National health- care quality and disparities chartbook on rural health care (AHRQ



Publication  No.  17(18)-001-2-EF). https://www.ahrq.gov/sites
/default/files/wysiwyg/research/findings/nhqrdr/chartbooks
/qdr-ruralhealthchartbook-update.pdf
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2017b). TeamSTEPPS Regional Training Centers. https://www.ahrq.gov/teamstepps
/instructor/regionaltrainingcenters.html
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2019a). About Team- STEPPS. https://www.ahrq.gov/teamstepps/about-teamstepps/index
.html
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2019b). 2015 National healthcare quality and disparities report and 5th anniversary update on the national quality strategy (AHRQ Publication No. 16-0015) [Content last reviewed July 2019]. https://www.ahrq.gov/research
/findings/nhqrdr/nhqdr15/index.html
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2019c). National health- care quality and disparities report chartbook on patient safety (AHRQ Publication No. 19(20)-0070-2-EF). https://www.ahrq.gov/sites
/default/files/wysiwyg/research/findings/nhqrdr/chartbooks
/patientsafety/2018qdr-patsaf-chartbook.pdf
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2019d). 2018 National healthcare quality and disparities report (AHRQ Publication No. 19- 0070-EF). https://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/research
/findings/nhqrdr/2018qdr.pdf
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2020) National health- care quality and disparities report chartbook on healthcare for Asians and Native Hawaiians/Pacific Islanders (AHRQ Publication No. 20- 0043).    https://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/research
/findings/nhqrdr/chartbooks/asian-nhpi/asian-nhpi-chartbook
.pdf
American Diabetes Association. (2014). American Diabetes Associ- ation releases position statement on new BMI screening cut points for diabetes in Asian Americans. https://www.prnewswire.com
/news-releases/american-diabetes-association-releases-position- statement-on-new-bmi-screening-cut-points-for-diabetes-in- asian-americans-300013360.html
American Hospital Association. (2003). The patient care partnership.
  http://www.aha.org/content/00-10/pcp_english_030730.pdf American Hospital Association, National Center for Healthcare Lead-
ership, American College of Health Care Executives, & Institute
for Diversity in Health Management. (2004). Strategies for Lead- ership: Does your hospital reflect the community it serves? A diversity and cultural proficiency assessment for leaders. https://www.aha.org
/system/files/2018-02/DiversityTool.pdf
American Hospital Association. (2015a). Equity of care: A tool- kit for eliminating health care disparities. http://www.hpoe.org
/Reports-HPOE/equity-of-care-toolkit.pdf
American Hospital Association. (2015b). #123for equity: A toolkit for achieving success and sharing your story. http://www.equityofcare
   .org/resources/resources/AHA123forEquityToolkitweb.pdf American Hospital Association. (2019). Community health and eq-
uity resources at the American Hospital Association. https://www
.aha.org/system/files/media/file/2019/10/AHA-Community- Health-and-Equity-Resources.pdf

American Nurses Association. (2015a). Code of ethics for nurses with interpretive statements, ePDF:978-1-55810-600-0. Nursesbooks. http://nursingworld.org/DocumentVault/Ethics-1/Code-of- Ethics-for-Nurses.html
American Nurses Association. (2015b). Nursing: Scope and standards of practice (3rd ed.) (Publication No. 9781558106192). Nursesbooks.
Andrulis, D, Delbanco, T.,  Avakian, L., & Shaw-Taylor, Y. (2014).
Conducting  a  cultural  competence  self-assessment.  https://www
.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/programs_campaigns/samhsa_hrsa
/cultural-competence-self-assessment.pdf
Arozullah, A. M., Yarnold, P. R., Bennett, C. L., Soltysik, R. C., Wolf, M. S., Ferreira, R. M., Lee, S-Y D., Costello, S., Shakir, A., Dernwood, C., Bryant, F. B., & Davis, T. (2007). Development and validation of a short-form, rapid estimate of adult literacy in medicine. Medical Care, 45(11), 1026–1033.
Batalova,J.,Blizzard,B.,&Bolter,J.,&MigrationPolicyInstitute.(2020, February 14). Frequently requested statistics on immigrants and im- migration in the United States. Spotlight, The Online Journal of the Migration Policy Institute. https://www.migrationpolicy.org/article
/frequently-requested-statistics-immigrants-and-immigration- united-states
Benkert, R., Hollie, B., Nordstrom, C. K., Wickson, B., & Bins-Emerick, L. (2009). Trust, mistrust, racial identity and patient satisfaction in urban African American primary care patients of nurse practitioners. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 41(2), 211–219.
Berkman, N. D., Sheridan, S. L., Donahue, K. E., Halpern, D. J.,
Viera, A., Crotty, K., Holland, A., Brasure, M., Lohr, K. N., Harden, E., Tant, E., Wallace, I., & Viswanathan, M. (2011, March). Health literacy interventions and outcomes: An updated systematic review (Evidence Report/Technology Assessment No. 199). (Prepared by RTI International–University of North Carolina Evidence-based Practice Center under Contract No.290-2007-10056-I[AHRQPublicationNo.11-E006]).Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.  https://archive.ahrq.gov
/research/findings/evidence-based-reports/literacyup-evidence- report.pdf
Betancourt, J. R., Renfrew, M. R., Green, A. R., Lopez, L., & Wasser- man, M. (2012, September). Improving patient safety systems for pa- tients with limited English proficiency: A guide for hospitals. (Prepared by the Disparities Solutions Center, Mongan Institute for Health Policy at Massachusetts General Hospital and Abt Associates, Cambridge, MA., under Contract No. HHSA2902006000111 [AHRQ Publication No. 12-0041]). Agency for Healthcare Re- search and Quality. https://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files
/publications/files/lepguide.pdf
Brega, A. G., Barnard, J., Mabachi, N. M., Weiss, B. D., DeWalt, D. A., Brach, C., Cifuentes, M., Albright, K., & West, D. R. (2015, January). AHRQ health literacy universal precautions tool- kit (2nd ed.). (Prepared by Colorado Health Outcomes Program, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus under Con- tract No. HHSA290200710008, TO#10 [AHRQ Publication No. 15-0023-EF]). Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.



https://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/professionals
/quality-patient-safety/quality-resources/tools/literacy-toolkit
/healthlittoolkit2.pdf
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019). Develop and test materials. https://www.cdc.gov/healthliteracy/developmaterials
/index.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020). Older adults.
https://www.cdc.gov/healthliteracy/developmaterials/audiences
/olderadults/index.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2016). Quality strategy 2016. https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient- Assessment-Instruments/QualityInitiativesGenInfo/Downloads
/CMS-Quality-Strategy.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2020a). Hospital re- admissions reduction program (HRRP). https://www.cms.gov
/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment-Instruments
/Value-Based-Programs/HRRP/Hospital-Readmission- Reduction-Program
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2020b). NHE (National Health Expenditure) fact sheet [Page last modified March 24, 2020]. https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems
/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/NationalHealthExpendData
/NHE-Fact-Sheet
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2020c). Toolkit for making written material clear and effective. https://www.cms.gov
/Outreach-and-Education/Outreach/WrittenMaterialsToolkit
/index?redirect=/WrittenMaterialsToolkit
Chen, L. A., Santos, S., Jandorf, L., Christie, J., Castillo, A., Winkel, G., & Itzkowitz, S. (2008). A program to enhance com- pletion of screening colonoscopy among urban minorities. Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 6(4), 443–450. [Classic]
Cross, T., Bazron, B. J., Dennis, K. W., & Isaacs, M. R. (1989). To- wards a culturally competent system of care: A monograph on effective services to minority children who are severely emotionally disturbed. Georgetown University Child Development Center, CASSP Tech- nical Assistance Center. [Classic]
Davis, T. C., Wolf, M. S., Arnold, C. L., Byrd, R. S.,
Long, S. W., Springer, T., Kennen, E., & Bocchini, J. A. (2006). Development and validation of the Rapid Estimate of Adolescent Literacy in Medicine (REALM-TEEN): A tool to screen adoles- cents for below-grade reading in health care settings. Pediatrics, 118(6), 1701–1714.
DeNavas-Walt, C., Proctor, B., & Smith, J. C. (2011). U.S. Census Bureau, current population reports, P60-239: Income, poverty, and health insurance coverage in the United States: 2010. U.S. Govern- ment Printing Office. https://www.census.gov/prod/2011pubs
/p60-239.pdf
Dey, J., Rosenoff, E., & West, K., & U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. (2016). Benefits of Medicaid expansion for behavioral health (ASPE Brief: 3-28-2016). https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default
/files/pdf/190506/BHMedicaidExpansion.pdf

FindLaw. (2017). Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964: Non-discrimination in federally-assisted program. https://civilrights
.findlaw.com/discrimination/title-vi-of-the-civil-rights-act-of-1964- non-discrimination-in.html
Frey, W. H. (2018). The US will become “minority white” in 2045, Census Projects. fte Brookings Institution. https://www
.brookings.edu/blog/the-avenue/2018/03/14/the-us-will- become-minority-white-in-2045-census-projects/
Garfield, R., & Orgera, K., & Kaiser Family Foundation. (2019). The uninsured and the ACA: A primer. Key facts about health insurance and the uninsured amidst changes to the Affordable Care Act. http:// files.kff.org/attachment/fte-Uninsured-and-the-ACA-A-Primer- Key-Facts-about-Health-Insurance-and-the-Uninsured-amidst- Changes-to-the-Affordable-Care-Act
Goode, T., Jones, W., & Mason, J. (2002). A guide to planning and im- plementing cultural competence organization self-assessment. National Center for Cultural Competence, Georgetown University Child Development Center.
Goode, T., Jones, W., Jackson, V., Bronheim, S., Dunne, C., Lorenzo-Hubert, I., & National Center for Cultural Competence, Georgetown University. (2010). Cultural and linguistic competence family organization assessment instrument. https://nccc.georgetown
.edu/documents/NCCC-CLCFOAAssessment.pdf
Govinfo. (2020). https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-
2 0 1 0 - t i t l e 4 2 / p d f / U S C O D E - 2 0 1 0 - t i t l e 4 2 - c h a p 2 1 - subchapV.pdf
Hasnain-Wynia, R., Pierce, D., Haque, A., HedgesGreising, C., Prince, V., & Reiter, J. (2007). Health research and educational trust disparities toolkit. http://www.hretdisparities.org
Health Research & Educational Trust. (2013). Becoming a cultur- ally competent health care organization. http://www.hpoe.org/ Reports-HPOE/becoming_culturally_competent_health_care_ organization.PDF
Heron, M. (2019, June 24). National Vital Statistics Reports, 68(6).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Dis- ease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statis- tics, & National Vital Statistics System. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs
/data/nvsr/nvsr68/nvsr68_06-508.pdf
Hsu, W. C., Cheung, S., Ong, E., Wong, K., Lin, S., Leon, K., Weinger, K., & King, G. L. (2006). Identification of linguistic barriers to diabetes knowledge and glycemic control in Chinese Americans with diabetes. Diabetes Care, 29(2), 415–416. https:// pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16443897/ [Classic]
Humes, K. R., Jones, N. A., Ramirez, R. R., & U.S. Census Bureau. (2010). C201BR-02:2010 census briefs: Overview of race and His- panic origin: 2010. https://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs
/c2010br-02.pdf
Institute for Diversity and Health Equity. (2018). About the institute.
https://ifdhe.aha.org/about-institute
Institute for Diversity and Health Equity. (2020a). Advancing health for LGBTQ communities. https://ifdhe.aha.org/advancing-health- lgbtq-communities



Institute for Diversity and Health Equity. (2020b). Resources on health equity and value. https://ifdhe.aha.org/resources-health-equity- and-value
Institute for Diversity and Health Equity. (2020c). Resources on in- clusion and diversity. https://ifdhe.aha.org/resources-inclusion- and-diversity
Institute of Medicine. (2001). Envisioning the national health care quality report. M. P. Hurtado, E. K. Swift, J. M. Corrigan (Eds.). National Academies Press. https://www.nap.edu/catalog/10073
/envisioning-the-national-health-care-quality-report
Institute of Medicine. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 21st century. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books
/NBK222273/
Institute of Medicine. (2010). Future directions for the na- tional healthcare quality and disparities reports. National Academies Press. https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/5d37
/2b4129ad74e19e553075005a818b4b847b84.pdf
Jackson, L. E. (1993). Understanding, eliciting and negotiating cli- ent’s multicultural health beliefs. Nurse Practitioner, 18(4), 30–32, 37–38, 41–43. [Classic]
Joslin Diabetes Center & Joslin Clinic. (2011, August 7). Clinical nutrition guideline for overweight and obese adults with type 2 diabetes, prediabetes or those at high risk for developing type 2 diabetes.
Joslin Diabetes Center, Inc., (2018; originally issued August 7, 2011). Clinical nutrition guideline for overweight and obese adults with type 2 diabetes (T2D) or prediabetes, or those at high risk for developing T2D. Joslin Clinical Oversight Committee, Ganda, O.P. Chair. https://joslin-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/www.joslin.org/assets
/2020-07/2ebdm_joslin_chapter_2.pdf
Joslin Diabetes Center, Inc. (2020a). https://www.joslin.org
Joslin Diabetes Center, Inc. (2020b). About the Asian American diabetes initiative (AADI). https://aadi.joslin.org/en/about-aadi
Joslin Diabetes Center, Inc. (2020c). Latino diabetes initiative.
https://www.joslin.org/patient-care/multicultural-programs
/latino-diabetes-initiative
Kutner, M., Greenberg, E., Jin, Y., & Paulsen, C. (2006). The health literacy of America’s adults: Results from the 2003 National Assessment of Adult Literacy (NCES 2006-483). U.S. Department of Educa- tion, National Center for Education Statistics. https://nces.ed.gov
/pubs2006/2006483.pdf [Classic]
Lee, B., & Forbes Media, LLC. (2016). Here are 10 Martin Lu- ther King, Jr. quotes for your health. https://www.forbes.com
/sites/brucelee/2016/01/18/ten-martin-luther-king-jr-quotes- for-your-health/#6376764846bf
Lee, S. Y., Bender, D. E., Ruiz, R. E., & Cho, Y. (2006). Development of an easy-to-use Spanish Health Literacy test. Health Services Re- search, 41(4, Pt.1), 1392–1412.
Lee, S. Y., Stucky, B. D., Lee, J. Y., Rozier, R. G., & Bender, D. E. (2010). Short assessment of health literacy-Spanish and English: A comparable test of health literacy for Spanish and English speakers. Health Services Research, 45(4), 1105–1120.

Leininger, M. M. (1991). Ethnonursing: A research method with enablers to study the theory of culture care. National League for Nursing. [Classic]
Leininger, M. M. (2001). Culture care diversity and universality: A the- ory of nursing. Jones & Bartlett Learning. [Classic]
Malone, T. (Chairman), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (1985). Report of the secretary’s (HHS) task force on black and minority health. http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/assets/pdf
/checked/1/ANDERSON.pdf [Classic]
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. (2020). Immigrant health and cancer disparities service. https://www.mskcc.org/departments
/psychiatry-behavioral-sciences/immigrant-health
Moch, R., Nassery, H. G., & Fareed, T. (2014). Incorporating medi- cal interpretation into your practice. Family Practice Management, 21(2), 16–21. https://www.aafp.org/fpm/2014/0300/p16.html
Morrison, A. K., Chanmugathas, R., Schapira, M., Gorelick, M. H., Hoffman, R. G., & Brousseau, D. C. (2014). Caregiver low health and nonurgent use of the pediatric emergency department for febrile illness. Academic Pediatrics, 14(5), 505–509. https://www
.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4149856/
National Academy of Sciences. (2015, April 28). Institute of Med- icine to become National Academy of Medicine [Press release]. https://www8.nationalacademies.org/onpinews/newsitem
.aspx?RecordID=04282015
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2018). Community-based health literacy interventions: Proceedings of a workshop. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29543418/
National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health. (2018a). Facing forward: Life after cancer treatment (NIH Publication No. 18-2424). https://www.cancer.gov/publications/patient-education
/life-after-treatment.pdf
National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health. (2018b). Siga adelante: La vida despues del tratamiento del cancer (NIH Publication No. 18-2424S). https://www.cancer.gov/espanol
/cancer/sobrellevar/supervivencia/sigaadelante.pdf
National Center for Cultural Competence, Georgetown University, Center for Child and Human Development. (2007). Curricula en- hancement module series: Definitions of cultural competence. https:// nccc.georgetown.edu/curricula/culturalcompetence.html
National Center for Cultural Competence, Georgetown University, Center for Child and Human Development. (2020a). Founda- tions: Conceptual frameworks/models, guiding values and principles. https://nccc.georgetown.edu/foundations/framework.php
Newby, O. J., & Gray, D. C. (2016). Culturally tailored group medical appointments for diabetic black Americans. The Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 12(5), 317–323.
New growth charts: A welcome improvement. (2002). Clinician Reviews, 12(7), 5.
Nielsen-Bohlman, L., Panzer, A. M., & Kindig, D. A. (Eds.). (2004). Health literacy: A prescription to end confusion. Institute of Med- icine (US) Committee on Health Literacy. https://pubmed.ncbi
.nlm.nih.gov/25009856/ [Classic]



Ortman, J. M., & Guarneri, C. E. (2018). U.S. Census Bureau. United States population projections: 2000 to 2050. https://www.census
.gov/content/dam/Census/library/working-papers/2009/demo
/us-pop-proj-2000-2050/analytical-document09.pdf
Parker, R. M., Ratzan, S. C., & Lurie, N. (2003). Health literacy: A policy challenge for advancing high-quality health care. Health Affairs, 22(4), 147–153.
Petersen, E., Davis, N. L., Goodman, D., Cox, S., Mayes, N., Johnston, E., Syverson, C., Seed, K., Shapiro-Mendoza, C. K., Callaghan, W. M., Barfield, W., & Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019, May 10). Vital signs: Pregnancy-related deaths, United States, 2011-2015, and strategies for prevention, 13 states, 2013-2017. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 68(18), 423–429. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6818e1
Pew Research Center. (2015, September). Modern immigration wave brings 59 million to U.S., driving population growth and change through 2065: Views of immigration’s impact on U.S. society mixed, chapter 5: U.S. foreign-born population trends. https://www
.pewresearch.org/hispanic/2015/09/28/modern-immigration- wave-brings-59-million-to-u-s-driving-population-growth-and- change-through-2065/
Radford, J., & Noe-Bustamante, L. (2019). Facts on U.S. immigrants, 2017: Statistical portrait of the foreign-born population in the United States. Pew  Research Center. https://www.pewresearch.org
   /hispanic/2019/06/03/facts-on-u-s-immigrants-trend-data/ Radford, J. (2019b). Key findings about U.S. immigrants. Pew Research
Center.       https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/06/17/key-
findings/
Ratzan, S. C., & Parker, R. M. (2000). Introduction. In C. R. Selden,
M. Zorn, S. C. Ratzan, & R. M. Parker (Eds.), National Library of Medicine current bibliographies in medicine: Health literacy (p. 5) (NLM Publication No. CBM2000-1). National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Rau, J., & Kaiser Health News. (2019, October 1). New round of Medicare readmission penalties hits 2,583 hospitals. https://khn.org
    /news/hospital-readmission-penalties-medicare-2583-hospitals/ Razak, F., Anand, S. S., Shannon, H., Vuksan, V., Davis, B., Jacobs, R.,
Teo, K. K., McQueen, M., & Yusuf, S. (2007). Defining obesity
cut points in a multiethnic population. Circulation: Journal of the American Heart Association, 115, 2111–2118.
Selden, C. R., Zorn, M., Ratzan, S. C., & Parker, R. M. (Eds.). Na- tional Library of Medicine current bibliographies in medicine: Health literacy (p. 5) (NLM Publication No. CBM2000-1). National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Semega, J., Kollar, M., Creamer, J., Mohanty, A., & U. S. Census Bureau. (2020). Current population reports (P60-266(RV2020), income and poverty in the United States: 2018. U.S. Government Printing Office. https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census
/library/publications/2019/demo/p60-266.pdf
Taheri, N., & Jackson, C. (2018). Ramadan: Information for health care providers. https://ethnomed.org/resource/ramadan-information-for- health-care-providers/

fte Joint Commission. (2011a). Advancing effective communication, cultural competence, and patient-and family-centered care for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community: A field guide. http://jointcommission.org/assets/1/18/LGBTFieldGuide.pdf
fte Joint Commission. (2014a). A crosswalk of the national stan- dards for culturally and linguistically appropriate services (CLAS) in health and health care to The Joint Commission ambulatory health care accreditation standards. https://www.jointcommission
.org/-/media/deprecated-unorganized/imported-assets/tjc/system- folders/topics-library/crosswalk_clas_ahc_20141110pdf
.pdf?db=web&hash=1A9119E24EF51B941108E0A3FF731DD3
fte Joint Commission. (2014b). A crosswalk of the national stan- dards for culturally and linguistically appropriate services (CLAS) in health and health care to The Joint Commission hospital accreditation standards. https://www.jointcommission.org/-/media/deprecated- unorganized/imported-assets/tjc/system-folders/assetmanager
/crosswalk-_clas_-20140718pdf.pdf?db  = web&hash 
=8F2B3D45FAFDE585072542F630517F22
fte Joint Commission. (2015, May). Overcoming the challenges of providing care to LEP patients. Quick Safety (13). https://www
.jointcommission.org/-/media/tjc/documents/newsletters/quick- safety-issue-13-lep-5-27-15-final2.pdf
fte Joint Commission. (2016, April). Implicit bias in health care.
Quick  Safety  (23).  https://www.jointcommission.org/-/media/tjc
/documents/newsletters/quick-safety-issue-23-apr-2016-final-rev
.pdf
fte Joint Commission. (2020). Medical record—Preferred language.
https://www.jointcommission.org/standards/standard-faqs
/hospital-and-hospital-clinics/record-of-care-treatment-and- services-rc/000001373/
Uberoi, N., Finegold, K., & Gee, E., & U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE). (2016). Health insurance coverage and the Affordable Care Act, 2010-2016. https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default
/files/pdf/187551/ACA2010-2016.pdf
University ofWashington. (2020). Culture clues. https://depts.washington
.edu/pfes/CultureClues.htm
U.S. Census Bureau. (2015, October). Detailed languages spoken at home and ability to speak English for the population 5 years and over: 2009–2013. https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2013/demo
/2009-2013-lang-tables.html
U.S. Census Bureau. (2018). S1603: Characteristics of people by lan- guage spoken at home, 2018: ACS (American Community Survey) survey 1-year estimates. https://data.census.gov/cedsci/table?q
=S1603&tid=ACSST1Y2018.S1603
U.S. Census Bureau. (2019, October 8). Older people projected to out- numberchildrenforfirsttimein U.S. history(Release No. CB18-41). https://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2018/cb18- 41-population-projections.html
U.S. Census Bureau. (2020a). Monthly population estimates for the United States: April 1, 2020 to December 1, 2020 (NA-EST2019-01). https:// www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/popest/2010s- national-total.html



U.S. Census Bureau. (2020b). Asian American and Pacific Islander her- itage month: May 2020 (Release No. CB20-FF.04). https://www
.census.gov/newsroom/facts-for-features/2020/aian.html
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Re- sources and Services Administration. (2015). Report to Con- gress, Patient Navigator Outreach and Chronic Disease Prevention Program, Fiscal Years 2008–2012. https://www.hrsa.gov/sites
/default/files/about/organization/bureaus/bhw/reportstocongress
/patientnavigatoroutreach.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Civil Rights. (2013). Guidance to federal financial assistance recipients regarding Title VI Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimina- tion Affecting Limited English Proficient Persons. https://www.hhs
.gov/civil-rights/for-individuals/special-topics/limited-english- proficiency/guidance-federal-financial-assistance-recipients- title-vi/index.html
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Civil Rights. (2020, May 12). Bulletin: Ensuring the rights of persons with limited English proficiency in health care during COVID-19. https:// www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/lep-bulletin-5-12-2020-english
.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2000). Healthy People 2010: Understanding and improving health (Vol. I, Conference edition).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2010a). Healthy People 2020: About healthy people. https://www.healthypeople.gov/sites/default
/files/HP2020_brochure_with_LHI_508_FNL.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Dis- ease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2010b). Healthy People 2020 framework. https://www.healthypeople.gov/sites/default/files
/HP2020Framework.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2010c). National action plan to improve health literacy. https://health.gov/sites/default
/files/2019-09/Health_Literacy_Action_Plan.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Dis- ease Prevention and Health Promotion. (2020). Healthy People   2030   framework. https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020
/About-Healthy-People/Development-Healthy-People-2030
/Framework
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Minority Health. (2013). National standards for culturally and linguistically ap- propriate services in health and health care: A blueprint for advancing and sustaining CLAS policy and practice. https://thinkculturalhealth
.hhs.gov/pdfs/EnhancedCLASStandardsBlueprint.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Minority Health. (2015). Center for Linguistic and Cultural Competence in Health Care: Goals & History. https://copdei.extension.org
/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Center-for-Linguistic-and-Cultural- Competency-in-Health-Care-fte-Office-of-Mi.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Minority Health. (2016a). A physician’s practical guide to culturally competent

care. https://thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov/education/physicians & https://cccm.thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Minority Health. (2016b). National standards for culturally and linguisti- cally appropriate services in health and health care: Compendium of state-sponsored national CLAS standards implementation activities. https://thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov/pdfs/CLASCompendium
.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Minority Health. (2016c). What is culturally competent nursing care: A cor- nerstone of caring? https://thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov/education
/nurses & https://ccnm.thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Minority Health. (2018). The National CLAS Standards. https://www
.minorityhealth.hhs.gov/omh/browse.aspx?lvl=2&lvlid=53
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Minority Health. (2019a). About the Office of Minority Health. https:// minorityhealth.hhs.gov/omh/browse.aspx?lvl=1&lvlid=1
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Minority Health. (2019b). Cultural and linguistic competency. https:// minorityhealth.hhs.gov/omh/browse.aspx?lvl=1&lvlid=6
U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division. (2019). Execu- tive Order 13166. https://www.justice.gov/crt/executive-order- 13166
U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division. (2020). Title VI, 42
U.S.C. § 2000d et seq., Statutes and Regulations, Title VI Statute, 42 U.S.C §§ 2000d - 2000d-7 (HTML or PDF). https://www
.justice.gov/crt/fcs/TitleVI-Overview
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2016; current as of July 10, 2020). Changes to the nutrition facts label. https://www.fda.gov
/food/food-labeling-nutrition/changes-nutrition-facts-label
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2020). How to understand and use the nutrition facts label. https://www.fda.gov/food
/new-nutrition-facts-label/how-understand-and-use-nutrition- facts-label
Wallace, L. (2006). Patients’ health literacy skills: fte missing demo- graphic variable in primary care research. Annals of Family Medi- cine, 4(1), 85–86.
Wallace, L., Rogers, E. S., Roskos, S. E., Holiday, D. B., & Weiss, B.
D. (2006). Brief report: Screening items to identify patients with limited health literacy skills. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 21(8), 874–877. [Classic]
Weiss, B. D., Mays, M. Z., Martz, W., Castro, K. M., DeWalt, D. A., Pigone, M. P., Mockbee, J., & Hale, F. (2005). Quick assessment of literacy in primary care: fte newest vital sign. Annals of Family Medicine, 3(6), 514–522. [Classic]
WellShare International. (2020). Diabetes during Ramadan. https:// ethnomed.org/resource/diabetes-during-ramadan/
Zong, J., Batalova, J., & Hallock, J. (2018). Frequently requested statistics on immigrants and immigration in the United States. Migration Policy Institute. https://www.migrationpolicy.org/article
/frequently-requested-statistics-immigrants-and-immigration- united-states-7#Children



CHAPTER 20
American Medical Association. (2016). Code of medical ethics, Opinion 9.4.2.
American Nurses Association. (2015). Code of ethics for nurses with in- terpretive statements.
Caldecott, C. V., & d’Oronzio, J. C. (2014). Ethics remediation, reha- bilitation, and recommitment to medical professionalism: A pro- grammatic approach. Ethics and Behavior. https://doi.org/10.1080
/10508422.2014.930687
Fast Facts #16. (2015, May). Moderating a family conference. https:// www.mypcnow.org/blank-qy84d
Kritek, P., & Joel, L. (2013). Conflict resolution: An essential com- petency in advanced practice. In L. Joel (Ed.), Advanced practice nursing (3rd ed.). F.A. Davis.
Malone, L. (2017). Dealing with conflict. In D. Stanley (Ed.), Clinical leadership in nursing and healthcare (2nd ed.). John Wiley & Sons. Rushton, C. H., Caldwell, M., & Kurtz, M. (2016, July). Moral dis-
tress. American Journal of Nursing, 116(7), 40–49.
fte ProBE Program, offered at various sites in the United States and Canada by the Center for Personalized Education of Profession- als (CPEP), Denver, CO. http://www.cpepdoc.org/cpep-courses
/probe-ethics-boundaries-program-united-states/2
Valentine, P. E. B. (2001). A gender perspective on conflict manage- ment strategies of nurses. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 33, 69–74. Weissman, D. (2016). Teaching materials adapted from Medical Col-
lege of Wisconsin Palliative Care Program. Lake Geneva, WI:
Palliative Care Education, LLC. http://www.mcw.edu/Palliative- Care-Program.htm
CHAPTER 21
Alilyyani, B., Wong, C., & Cummings, G. (2018). Antecedents, me- diators, and outcomes of authentic leadership in healthcare: A sys- tematic review. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 83, 34–64.
American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2006) (Annual) Sample sur- vey: Compensation and practice.  https://my.aanp.org/ProductCatalog
/ProductCategory.aspx?ID=14
Barker, E. (2006). Mentoring—A complex relationship. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 18, 56–61.
Bass, B. (1985). Leadership and performance beyond expectations. fte Free Press.
Bass, B. M., & Riggio, R. E. (2008). Transformational leadership
(2nd ed.). Erlbaum Associates.
Begley, C., Murphy, K., Higgins, A., & Cooney, A. (2014). Policy-makers review on impact of specialist and advanced practi- tioner roles in Ireland: fte SCAPE study. Journal of Nursing Man- agement, 22(4), 410–422.
Bhave’s  Entrepreneurial  Model.  (1994). https://www.researchgate.net
   /figure/Bhaves-Two-Types-of-Entrepreneurial-Processes Blanchard, K. (2008, May). Situational leadership. Leadership Excel-
lence, 25(5), 19.
Bolman, L. G., & Deal, T. E. (2017). Reframing organizations: Artistry, choice, and leadership (6th ed). Jossey-Bass.

Boyatzis, R. (2011). Managerial and leadership competencies: A be- havioral approach to emotional, social and cognitive intelligence. Vision, 15(2), 91–100.
Briggs, D. (2016). Responding to the call for innovation: How do we develop health professionals’ skills and operationalize innovation? Asia Pacific Journal of Health Management, 11(1), 4–6.
Broome, M., & Marshall, E. (2021). Transformational leadership in nursing (3rd ed.). Springer.
Burchill, K. (2010). ARRA and meaningful use: Is your organization ready? Journal of Healthcare Management, 55(4), 232–235.
Burns, J. (1978). Leadership. Harper & Row.
Cadmus, E., Johansen, M., Zimmer, P., & Knowlton, D. (2017). Entrepreneurship: Assessing the readiness of the New Jersey APN workforce. Nursing Administration Quarterly, 41(4), 48–55. https://doi.org/10.1097/NAQ.0000000000000203
Center to Champion Nursing in America. (2011, March 1). http:// www.rwjf.org/en/library/research/2012/08/center-to-champion- nursing-in-america.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2016). Medicare and Med- icaid EHR incentive program (regulations and guidance). http://cms.gov Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2019a). 2019 end of year
accomplishments  fact  sheet.  https://www.cms.gov/files/document
/2019-eoy-accomplishments-fact-sheet.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2019b). Direct con- tracting model options. https://innovation.cms.gov/initiatives
/direct-contracting-model-options/
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2019c). IVIG. https:// innovation.cms.gov/innovation-models/IVIG/
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2019d). Part D payment   modernization   model.   https://innovation.cms.gov
   /innovation-models/part-d-payment-modernization-model/ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2019e). Part D senior
savings	model.	https://innovation.cms.gov/innovation-models
/part-d-savings-model
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2019f). Value based insur- ance design models. https://innovation.cms.gov/innovation-models
/vbid/
Christensen, C., Baumann, H., Ruggles, R., & Sadtler, T. (2006). Dis- ruptive innovations for social change. Harvard Business Review, 12, 94–101.
Christensen, C., Bohmer, R., & Kenagy, J. (2000). Will disruptive in- novations cure health care? Harvard Business Review, 9, 102–112.
Covey, S. (2007). Leadership in the 21st century [Everest DVD]. Frank- lin Covey.
Cox, K. (2018). Use of emotional intelligence to enhance advanced practice registered nursing competencies. Journal of Nursing Edu- cation, 57(11), 648–654.
Crowell, D. (2016). Complexity leadership (2nd ed.). F.A. Davis. Dinh, J., Lord, R., Gardner, W.,  Meuser, J., Liden, R., & Hu, J.
(2014). Leadership theory and research in the new millennium:
Current theoretical trends and changing perspectives. Leadership Quarterly, 25, 36–62.



Dopson, S., Fitzgerald, L., & Ferlie, E. (2008). Understanding change and innovation in healthcare settings: Reconceptualizing the active role of context. Journal of Change Management, 8(3-4), 213–231.
Dorsey, L., & Baker, C. (2004). Mentoring undergraduate nursing stu- dents. Nurse Educator, 29, 260–265.
Eckert, R., West, M., Altman, D., Steward, K., & Pasmore, B. (2014). Delivering a collective leadership strategy for health care. Greensboro, NC, Center for Creative Leadership.
Elango, B., Hunter, G., & Wincell, M. (2007). Barriers to nurse entrepreneurship. A study of the process model of entrepreneur- ship. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 19, 198–204.
Elliott, N. (2017). Building leadership capacity in advanced nurse practitioners: fte role of organizational management. Journal of Nursing Management, 25, 77–81.
Fielder, F. (1978). Fielder’s contingency model. Advances in Experi- mental Social Psychology, 11, 59–112. http://www.coachingcosmos
.com/38.html
Fillion, G., Koffi, V., & Ekionea, J. (2015). Peter Senge’s learning or- ganization: A critical view and the addition of some new concepts to actualize theory and practice. Journal of Organizational Culture, Communications and Conflict, 19(3), 73–102.
Hines, N., & Martinez, A. (2019). 3 Keys to US health system success in the 2020s [White paper], Greensboro, NC, Center for Creative Leadership.
Galea, S. (2018). Will disruptive innovation in health care improve the health of populations? The Milbank Quarterly, 96(4), 619–622.
Goleman, D., & Boyatzis, R. (2008). Social intelligence and the biol- ogy of leadership. Harvard Business Review, 86, 74–81.
Goleman, D., Boyatzis, R., & McKee, A. (2013). Primal leadership.
Harvard Business School Press.
Greenleaf Center for Servant Leadership. (2010). What is servant lead- ership? http://www.greenleaf.org
Gundogdu, M. (2012). Re-thinking entrepreneurship, intrapreneur- ship and innovation: A multi-concept perspective. Emerging Mar- kets Journal, 1, 61–69.
Hammond, S. (1998). The thin book of appreciative inquiry (2nd ed.). ftin Book Publishing Company.
Hamric, A., Hanson, C., Tracy, M., & O’Grady, E. (2014). Advanced practice nursing: An integrative approach (5th ed.). Saunders, Elsevier.
Harrington, S. (2011). Mentoring new nurse practitioners to accel- erate their development as primary care providers: A literature re- view. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 23, 168–174.
Heinen, M., van Oostveen, C., Peters, J., Vermeulen, H., & Huis, A. (2019). An integrative review of leadership competencies and at- tributes in advanced nursing practice. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 75(11), 2378–2392. https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.14092
Hersey, P., Blanchard, K. H., & Johnson, D. E. (2007). Management of organizational behavior: Leading human resources (9th ed.). Prentice Hall.

Institute of Medicine. (2000). To err is human: Building a safer health system. National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. National Academies Press.
Joel, L. (1997). Charged to mentor. American Journal of Nursing, 97(2), 7.
Jooste, K. (2004). Leadership: A new perspective. Journal of Nursing Management, 12, 217–223.
Kim, C., & Mauborgne, R. (2015). Blue ocean strategy: Expanded edi- tion. Harvard Business School Publishing.
Kouzes, J., & Posner, B. (2017). The leadership challenge (6th ed.). John Wiley & Sons.
Lindberg, C., Nash, S., & Lindberg, C. (2008). On the edge: Nursing in the age of complexity. Plexus Press.
Ludema, J., Whitney, D., Mohr, B., & Griffin, T. (2003). The apprecia- tive inquiry summit. Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Luthans, F., & Avolio B. (2003). Authentic leadership: A positive developmental approach. In K. S. Cameron, J. E. Duon, &
R. E. Quinn (Eds), Positive organizational scholarship (pp. 241– 261). Barrett-Koehler.
Mannix, J., Wilkes, L., & Daly, J. (2015). Aesthetic leadership: Its place in the clinical nursing world. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 36(5), 357–361.
Merriam-Webster. (n.d.). Networking. In Merriam-Webster.com dic- tionary. Retrieved October 14, 2020, from https://www.merriam- webster.com/dictionary/networking
Nathan E., Mulyadi, B., Sen, S., van Dierendonck, D., & Liden, R. (2019). Servant leadership: A systematic review and call for future research. Leadership Quarterly, 30, 111–132.
National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine. (2016). Assessing progress on the Institute of Medicine report: The future of nursing. National Academies Press.
National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine. (2019).
Future of nursing 2020–2030 objectives. https://nam.edu/publications
/the-future-of-nursing-2020-2030/
National Organization of Nursing Practitioner Faculties.  (2018).
NONPF  leadership  mentoring  program. https://www.nonpf.org
/page/mentoringprogram
Naylor, M., Brooten, D., Campbell, R., Maislin, G., Mc Cauley, K., & Schwartz, J. (2004). Transitional care of older adults hospital- ized with heart failure: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Geriatric Society, 52, 675–684.
New Jersey Collaborating Center for Nursing. (2019). Policy analysis improving access to care for New Jersey. http://www.njccn.org/wp- content/uploads/2019/06/APN-Policy-Analysis-from-NJCCN.pdf
Oxford English Dictionary. (2020, September). Entrepreneur. In Oxford English dictionary online. Retrieved October 14, 2020, from https://www.oed.com/view/Entry/62991?redirectedFrom= entrepreneur#eid
OxfordEnglishDictionary.(2020,September).Intrapreneur.InOxfordEn- glish dictionary online. Retrieved October 14, 2020, from https://www
.oed.com/view/Entry/243554?redirectedFrom=intrapreneur#eid



Peters, J. W. B., & Roodbol P. F. (2020). Leadership in maintain- ing standards for the APN role. In S. Hassmiller & J. Pulcini (Eds.), Advanced practice nursing leadership: A global perspective. Advanced Practice in Nursing (Under the auspices of the In- ternational Council of Nurses [ICN]). Springer. https://doi
.org/10.1007/978-3-030-20550-8_14
Pinchot, G. (1985). Intrapreneuring. Harper & Row Publishers. Plsek, P. (2003, January 27 & 28). Complexity and the adoption of in-
novation in health care [Convened by the National Institute for
Health Care Management Foundation and the National Commit- tee for Quality Health Care]. fte Institute. https://www.nihcm
.org/pdf/Plsek.pdf
Porter O’Grady, T., Malloch, K., & Stichler, J. (2018). Quantum lead- ership: Creating sustainable value in health care (5th ed.). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Raza, S., & Standing, C. (2011). A systemic model for managing and evaluating conflicts in organizational change. Systems Practice Ac- tion Research, 24, 187–210.
Rogers, E. (2003). Diffusion of innovations (5th ed.). fte Free Press.
Rojas-Guyler, L., Murnan, J., & Coltrell, R. (2007). Networking for career-long success: A powerful strategy for health education pro- fessionals. Health Promotion Practice, 8(3), 229–233.
Rost, J. (1995). Leadership: A discussion about ethics. Business Ethics Quarterly, 5(1), 129–142.
Senge, P. (1994). The fifth discipline. Doubleday.
Shirey, M. (2007). An evidence-based understanding of entrepreneur- ship in nursing. Clinical Nurse Specialist, 21(5), 234–240.
Sipe, J., & Frick, D. (2009). Seven pillars of servant leadership: Practic- ing the wisdom of leading by serving. Paulist Press.
Stanley, D. (2006a). In command of care: Toward the theory of clinical leadership. Journal of Nursing Research, 2(2), 132, 144.
Stanley, D. (2006b). In command of care: Clinical nurse leadership explored. Journal of Research in Nursing, 11(1), 20–39.
Stanley, D. (2008, July). Congruent leadership: Values in action. Jour- nal of Nursing Management, 16(5), 519–524.
ftompson, G., & Vecchio, R. (2009). Situational leadership theory: A test of three versions. Leadership Quarterly, 20, 837–848.
Trader-Leigh, K. (2001). Case study: Identifying resistance in manag- ing change. Journal of Organizational Change Management Deci- sions, 36(8), 543–548.
Trajkovski, S., Schmied, V., Vickers, M., & Jackson, D. (2013). Im- plementing the 4D cycle of appreciative inquiry in health care: A methodological review. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 69(6), 1224–1234.
Uhl-Bien, M. (2006). Relational leadership theory: Exploring the so- cial processes of leadership and organizing. Leadership Quarterly, 17, 654–676.
Van Dierendonck, D. (2011). Servant leadership: A review and syn- thesis. Journal of Management, 37(4), 1228–1261. https://doi
.org/10.1177/0149206310380462
Veronesi, J. (2009). Breaking news on social intelligence. Journal of Nursing Administration, 39(2), 57–59.

Vogus, T., & Singer, S. (2016). Creating highly reliable account- able care organizations. Medical Care Research and Review, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1177/10775558716640413
Vroom, V., & Jago, A. (2007). fte role of situation in leadership.
American Psychologist, 62(1), 17–24.
Vroom, V. H., & Yetton, P. W. (1973). Leadership and decision-making.
University of Pittsburgh Press.
Weaver, R. (2015, July–September). Seeking high reliability in primary care: Leadership, tools, and organization. Health Care Management Review, 183–192.
Wheatley, M. (2006). Leadership and the new science (3rd ed.).
Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Wheatley, M. (2007). Finding our way: Leadership for an uncertain time. Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Wheatley, M., & Frieze, D. (2010). Leadership in the age of complexity: From hero to host. Retrieved from http://www.margaretwheatley
.com/articles/Leadership-in-Age-of-Complexity.pdf
White, K., Pillay, R., & Huang, X. (2016). Nurse leaders and the inno- vation competence gap Nursing Outlook, 64(3), 255–261.

CHAPTER 22
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2009). Computerized provider order entry. https://psnet.ahrq.gov/primers/primer/6
/computerized-provider-order-entry
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2020). Health infor- mation technology integration. http://www.ahrq.gov/professionals
/prevention-chronic-care/improve/health-it/index.html
Abbott, P. A., & Weinger, M. B. (2020). Health information tech- nology: Fallacies and sober realities – Redux A homage to Bentzi Karsh and Robert Wears. Applied Ergonomics, 82. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2019.102973
Ahn, S. J., & Grace, J. (2017). Immersive virtual environments, ava- tars, and agents for health. Encyclopedia of health and risk message design and processing (Vol. 1). Oxford University Press. http://doi
   .org.ezproxy.shu.edu/10.1093/acrefore/9780190228613.013.325 American Academyof Family Practitioners.(2020, July 21). Understand-
ing features and functions of an ehr. https://www.aafp.org/practice-
management/health-it/product/features-functions.html
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2019). Curriculum improve- ment. https://www.aacnnursing.org/Population-Health-Nursing
/Curriculum-Improvement
Baillieu, R., Hoang, H., Sripipatana, A., Nair, S., & Lin, S. C. (2020). Impact of health information technology optimization on clinical quality performance in health centers: A national cross-sectional study. PLOS ONE, 15(7), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal
.pone.0236019
Brennan, K. S. (2015). Clinical implications of pharmacogenetic and microarray testing for advanced practice nurses. Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, 27, 246–255.
Buerhaus, P. I. (2020). Demystifying national healthcare reform pro- posals: Implications for nurses. Nursing Economic$, 38(2), 58–64.



Built-In. (2020, July 20). Artificial intelligence: What is AI and how does it work? https://builtin.com/artificial-intelligence
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2014). EHR incen- tive programs 2015 through 2017: Objectives and measurement for eligible professionals. https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and- Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/Downloads/EP_ ObjectiveMeasuresTable-.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2015, February 10).
Medicare and Medicaid HER incentive programs.  https://www
.healthit.gov/FACAS/sites/faca/files/Joint_EHR_Incentive_ Program_FINAL_2015-02-10_0.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2016). Electronic health records (EHR) incentive programs. https://www.cms.gov/Regulations- and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/
Centers  for  Medicare  and  Medicaid  Services.  (2020,  June 20).
Electronic health records.  https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/E-health
/EHealthRecords/index.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2020, June 20). Quality payment program. https://innovation.cms.gov/about
?osi?, K., Popovi?, S., Šarlija, M., Kesedži?, I., & Jovanovic, T. (2020). Artificial intelligence in prediction of mental health dis- orders induced by the COVID-19 pandemic among health care workers. Croatian Medical Journal, 61(3), 279–288. https://doi
.org/10.3325/cmj.2020.61.279
Edwards, Q. T., & Maradiegue, A. H. (2018). Genetics and genomics in nursing: Guidelines for conducting a risk assessment. Springer.
Esmaeilzadeh, P., Mirzaei, T., & Maddah, M. (2020). fte effects of data entry structure on patients’ perceptions of information quality in Health Information Exchange (HIE). International Journal of Medical Informatics, 135. https://doi.org/10.1016
/j.ijmedinf.2019.104058
Freeman, D. S., Hudgins, C., & Hornberger, J. (2018). Legislative and policy developments and imperatives for advancing the Pri- mary Care Behavioral Health (PCBH) Model. Journal of Clin- ical Psychology in Medical Settings, 25(2), 210–223. https://doi
.org/10.1007/s10880-018-9557-8
Gaba, D. M. (2004). fte future vision of simulation in health care.
The International Journal of Healthcare Improvement, 13, 2–10.
Gill, E., Dykes, P. C., Rudin, R. S., Storm, M., McGrath, K., & Bates,
D. W. (2020). Technology-facilitated care coordination in rural ar- eas: What is needed? International Journal of Medical Informatics, 137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2020.104102
Guthold, R., Stevens, G. A., Riley, L. M., & Bull, F. C. (2018). World- wide trends in insufficient physical activity from 2001 to 2016: A pooled analysis of 358 population-based surveys with 1.9 million participants. The Lancet Global Health, 6, e1077–e1086.
Hasman, A., IOS Press, Liaskos, J., Househ, M., & Mantas, J. (2018). Data, informatics and technology: An inspiration for improved health- care. IOS Press.
Hyppönen, H., Lumme, S., Reponen, J., Vänskä, J., Kaipio, J., Hepo- niemi, T., & Lääveri, T. (2019). Health information exchange in Finland: Usage of different access types and predictors of paper use.

International Journal of Medical Informatics, 122, 1–6. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2018.11.005
Institute of Medicine. (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. National Academies Press.
Jones, S. S., Rudin, R. S., Tanja, P., & Shekelle, P. G. (2014). Health information technology: An updated systematic review with a focus on meaningful use. Annals of Internal Medicine, 160, 48–54.
Joyce, B., Brown-Schott, N., Hicks, V., Johnson, R. G., Harmon, M., & Pilling, L. (2017). fte global health nursing imperative: Using competency-based analysis to strengthen accountability for population focused practice, education, and research. Annals of Global Health, 83(3–4), 641–653. https://doi.org/10.1016
/j.aogh.2017.05.006
Kang, S. J., Hong, C. M., & Lee, H. (2020). fte impact of virtual simulation on critical thinking and self-directed learning ability of nursing students. Clinical Simulation in Nursing. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.ecns.2020.05.008
Khan, S. H. (2020). Artificial intelligence in healthcare setups: Pros and cons and way for ward to manage. Pakistan Armed Forces Med- ical Journal, 70(2), 635–639.
Kim, K. K., Sankar, P., Wilson, M. D., & Haynes, S. C. (2017). Fac- tors affecting willingness to share electronic health data among California consumers. BMC Medical Ethics, 18(1), 1–10.
Kowitlawakul, Y., Chow, Y., Hussian, Z., Salam, A., & Ignacio, J. (2015). Exploring the use of standardized patients for simulation-based learning in preparing advanced practice nurses. Nurse Education Today, 35, 894–899.
Layon, A. J., Gabrielli, A., Yu, M., & Wood, K. E. (2018). Civetta, Taylor, & Kirby’s critical care medicine (5th ed.). Wolters Kluwer Health.
Magyar, G. (2017). Blockchain: Solving the privacy and research avail- ability tradeoff for EHR data: A new disruptive technology in health data management. 2017 IEEE 30th Neumann Colloquium (NC), Neumann Colloquium (NC), 2017 IEEE 30th, 000135–000140. https://doi.org/10.1109/NC.2017.8263269
Mahmoud-Davis, S. A. (2020). Direct-to-consumer genetic testing: Empowering EU consumers and giving meaning to the informed consent process within the IVDR and GDPR frameworks. Wash- ington University Global Studies Law Review, 19(1), 1–52.
Marchant, G., Barnes, M., Evans, J. P., LeRoy, B., Wolf, S. M., Clayton, E. W., & Lawrenz, F. (2020). From genetics to genom- ics: Facing the liability implications in clinical care. Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, 48(1), 11–43. https://doi.org/10.1177
/1073110520916994
McCormick, K. A., & Calzone, K. A. (2016, April). fte impact of genomics on health outcomes, quality, and safety. Nursing Man- agement, 47(4), 23–26.
McMullen, P. C., Howie, W. O., Philipsen, N., Bryant, V. C., Setlow,
P. D., Calhoun, M., & Green, Z. D. (2014). Electronic medical records and electronic health records: Overview for nurse practi- tioners. The Journal of Nurse Practitioners, 10, 660–665.



McNeal, G. J. (2019). Implementing interprofessional team-based training for diverse student populations using a person-centered conceptual framework. ABNF Journal, 30(4), 96–108.
Mompoint-Williams, D., Brooks, A., Lee, L., Watts, P., & Moss, J. (2014). Using high-fidelity simulation to prepare advanced prac- tice nursing students. Clinical Simulation in Nursing, 10, 5–10.
Moore, C., McLister, C., Donnelly, M., & McKenna, G. (2020). Pre-radiotherapy dental extractions in patients with head and neck cancer: a Delphi study. Journal of Dentistry, 97. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.jdent.2020.103350
Ng, Y.-L., Ma, F., Ho, F. K., Ip, P., & Fu, K. (2019). Effectiveness of virtual and augmented reality-enhanced exercise on physical activity, psychological outcomes, and physical performance: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Computers in Human Behavior, 99, 278–291. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.chb.2019.05.026
Office for Civil Rights. (2017). HIPAA for professionals. http://www
.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/index.html
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Tech- nology. (2020). Health IT legislation and regulations. https:// www.healthit.gov/policy-researchers-implementers/health- it-legislation-and-regulations
Rawson, R. A., Rieckmann, T., Cousins, S., McCann, M., & Pearce,
R. (2019). Patient perceptions of treatment with medication treat- ment for opioid use disorder (MOUD) in the Vermont hub-and- spoke system. Preventive Medicine, 128.  https://doi.org/10.1016
/j.ypmed.2019.105785
Saifee, D. H., Bardhan, I. R., Lahiri, A., & Zheng, Z. (Eric). (2019). Adherence to clinical guidelines, electronic health record use, and online reviews. Journal of Management Information Systems, 36(4), 1071–1104. https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2019.166109
Silvestri, S., Esposito, A., Gargiulo, F., Sicuranza, M., Ciampi, M., & De Pietro, G. (2019). A big data architecture for the extraction and analysis of EHR data. 2019 IEEE World Congress on Ser- vices (SERVICES), World Congress on Services (SERVICES), 2019 IEEE, 2642–939X, 283–288. https://doi.org/10.1109
/SERVICES.2019.00082
Stephenson, E., Zeynep, S., & Cullen, D. (2015). Advanced practice nursing simulation for neonatal skill competency: A pilot study for successful continuing education. The Journal of Continuing Educa- tion in Nursing, 46(7), 322–325.
Sutton, R. T., Pincock, D., Baumgart, D. C., Sadowski, D. C., Fe- dorak, R. N., & Kroeker, K. I. (2020). An overview of clinical decision support systems: Benefits, risks, and strategies for suc- cess. NPJ Digital Medicine, 3(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1038
/s41746-020-0221-y
fte Institute for Health Care Improvement. (2020, June 20). Improv- ing health and healthcare worldwide. http://www.ihi.org/Engage
/Initiatives/TripleAim/Pages/default.aspx
Vanderhoff, M. (2020). AI: Huge potential, or an impenetrable black box? Artificial intelligence offers many benefits to health care pro- fessionals—and likely will be a key component of future practice — but it’s not without its drawbacks. PT in Motion, 12(5), 20–26.

Walker-Smith, T., Murphey, C., & Peck, J. L. (2019). Addressing whole-genome sequencing and breast cancer in primary care: Whole-genome sequencing data collection includes the iden- tification of disease processes, such as breast cancer; linked to well-known phenotypes. Clinical Advisor, 1, 25.
Waxman, K. T., Nichols, A. A., Shum, C., & Forsey, L. (2019). Ex- ploring faculty perceptions about simulation training: Influence on career, confidence, knowledge and skill acquisition and com- petence. International Journal of Nursing Education Scholarship, 16(1). https://doi.org/10.1515/ijnes-2018-0067
Wolf, S. M., Ossorio, P. N., Berry, S. A., Greely, H. T., McGuire, A. L.,
Penny, M. A., Terry, S. F., Clayton, E. W., & Lawrenz, F. (2020). Integrating rules for genomic research, clinical care, public health screening and DTC testing: Creating translational law for transla- tional genomics. Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, 48(1), 69–86. https://doi.org/10.1177/1073110520916996
Wright, H., Birks, M., Zhao, L., & Mills, J. (2019). Genomics in oncology nursing practice in Australia. Collegian. https://doi.org
/10.1016/j.colegn.2019.11.008
Ziran, B. H., & O’Pry, E. K. (2020). Proposal of a new shared payment model for healthcare financing in the United States: A hypothe- sis. Patient Safety in Surgery, 14(1), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1186
/s13037-020-00242-w

CHAPTER 23
Academy Health. (2015, May). Writing articles for peer-review publica- tions: A quick reference guide for PHSSR.
Dixon, N. (2001). Writing for publication—A guide for new authors (Methodology Matters). International Journal for Quality in Health Care, 11(5), 417–423.
Dowdall, M. (2016, November 21). How to write a research article to submit for publication. The Pharmaceutical Journal.
Christianson, S., Iverson, C., Flanagin, A., et al. (2020). AMA manual of style, a guide for authors and editors (11th ed.). Oxford University Press.
Gardner, J. (1961). Excellence: Can we be equal and excellent, too?
Harper & Row. [Classic]
Germain, C. H. (1979). The cancer unit: An ethnography. Nursing Re- sources (orig., U of Michigan). [Classic]
Goldacre, B. (2008). Bad science. HarperCollins Publishers, Fourth Estate. [Classic]
Goldacre, B. (2012). Bad pharma: How medicine is broken and how we can fix it. HarperCollins Publishers, Fourth Estate. (Revised 2013) [Classic]
Goldacre, B. (2014). I think you’ll find it’s a bit more complicated than that.
   HarperCollins Publishers, Fourth Estate. (Paperback 2015) [Classic] Grob, G. (1991). From asylum to community: Mental health policy in
America. Princeton University Press. [Classic]
Grob, G. (1994). The mad among us. fte Free Press. [Classic]
ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest, Uniform Requirements. (n.d.). International Committee of Medical Journal Editors. http://www.icmje.org/urm_main.html



Institute of Medicine. (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. National Academies of Science.
Malone, B., & Smoyak, S. (2002). Managed care and mental health: A mixture of optimism and caution. In D. Mason, J. Leavitt, &
M. Chaffee (Eds.), Policy & politics in nursing and healthcare
(pp. 218–222). Saunders, Elsevier Science.
Mason, D., Leavitt, J., & Chaffee, M. (Eds.). (2002). Policy & politics in nursing and health care. Saunders, Elsevier Science. [Classic]
Nicoll, L. H. (2017). Nurse author & editor. http://www
.NurseAuthorEditor.com
Open Access. (2002). Read the Budapest open access initiative. http:// www.budapestopenaccessinitiative.org/read
Roush, K. (2017, May). What types of articles to write. American Jour- nal of Nursing, 117(5), 68–71.
Slack, Inc. (2011). Author statement, Wyanoke Group, 6900 Grove Road, ftorofare, NJ.
Smoyak, S. (2016a, June). Do you coddle or challenge? The Journal of Psychosocial Nursing and Mental Health Services, 52(6), 13–14.
Smoyak, S. (2016b, September). Editors need to deliver better science. The Journal of Psychosocial Nursing and Mental Health Services, 56(9), 14–15.
Smoyak, S. (2016c, August). What’s in a name? The Journal of Psychoso- cial Nursing and Mental Health Services, 54(8), 14–15.
Strunk, W., Jr. (2009). The elements of style (20th ed.). Longman Publishing. [Classic]
Webb, C. (2014). Writing for publication. Wiley-Blackwell Publishing Co. [Classic]
Zinsser, W. (1980). On writing well (2nd ed.). Harper & Row. [Classic]

CHAPTER 24
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2012). Consumer assessment of health plans. http://www.ahrq.gov/policymakers/measurement
/consumer-assessment/index.html
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (2015). The 2015 national health care quality and disparities report. http://www.ahrq
.gov/research/findings/nhqrdr/nhqdr15/
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2016). Surveys and tools to advance patient-centered care. https://www.cahps.ahrq.gov
/Surveys-Guidance/CG.aspx
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2018). Surveys and tools to advance patient-centered care.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality – Patient Safety Orga- nizations. (2019). Federally-listed PSOs. https://pso.ahrq.gov/listed Aiken, L. H., Clarke, S. P., Sloane, D. M., Sochalski, J., & Silber, J.
H. (2001). Nurses report on hospital care in five countries. Health
Affairs, 20(3), 43–53.
Aiken, L. H., Clarke, S. P., Sloane, D. M., Sochalski, J., & Silber, J.
H. (2002). Hospital nurse staffing and patient mortality, burnout and job dissatisfaction. Journal of the American Medical Association, 288(16), 1987–1993.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2011). Essentials of mas- ter’s education in nursing.

American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2016). The Joint Com- mission appoints new AANA representative to hospital PTAC.
American Hospital Association. (2002). In our hands: How hospital leaders can build a thriving workforce. [Classic]
American Hospital Association. (2016). Individuals’ ability to electroni- cally access their hospital medical records, perform key tasks is growing.
Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation. (2020). About APSF. http:// www.apsf.org/about.php
Aquilino, M. L., Damiano, P. C., Willard, J. C., Momony, E. T., & Levy, B. T. (1999). Primary care physician perceptions of the nurse practitioner in the 1990s. Archives of Family Medicine, 8(3), 224–227.
Barnason, S., & Rasmussen, D. (2002). Patient outcomes beyond hospitalization: Carotid endarterectomy surgical patient outcomes after a rapid recovery program. Clinical Nurse Specialist, 16(2), 100–105.
Beal, J. A., & Philips, M. (1999). The nurse practitioner role in the NICU: A study of role turnover [Conference presentation]. Eastern Nursing Research Society, New York, NY, United States.
Berwick, D. M., Nolan, K., & Whittington, J. (2016). fte triple aim: Care, health and cost. Health Affairs, 27, 759–769.
Blumenthal, D., Abrams, M. S., & Nuzum, R. (2015). fte afford- able care act at 5 years. New England Journal of Medicine, 372, 2451–2458.
Borchers, L., & Kee, C. C. (1999). An experience in telenursing. Clin- ical Nurse Specialist, 13(3), 115–118.
Bowles, J., Batcheller, J., Adams, J. M., Zimmermann, D., & Pappas,
S. (2019). Nursing’s leadership role in addressing the quadruple aim. Nursing Administration Quarterly, 43(2), 157–163. https:// doi.org/10.1097/NAQ.00000000000003
Bozzo, J., Carlson, B., & Diers, D. (1998). Using hospital data systems to find target populations: New tools for clinical nurse specialists. Clinical Nurse Specialist, 12(2), 86–91. [Classic]
Brooten, D., & Naylor, M. D. (1995). Nurses’ effect on changing pa- tient outcomes. Image: The Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 27(2), 95–99.
Brown, S. J. (2000). Direct clinical practice. In A. B. Hamric, J. A. Spross, & C. M. Hanson (Eds.), Advanced practice nursing: An in- tegrative approach (2nd ed., pp. 137–182). W. B. Saunders.
Buerhaus, P. I., & Norman, L. (2001). It’s time to require theory and methods of quality improvement in basic and graduate nursing education. Nursing Outlook, 49(2), 67–69.
Bunting, R. F., Jr., & Groszkruger, D. P. (2016). From to err is hu- man to improving diagnosis in health care: fte risk management perspective. Journal of Healthcare Risk Management, 35(3), 10–23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002./jhrm.21205
Burl, J. B., Bonner, A., Rao, M., & Khan, A. (1998). Geriatric nurse practitioners in long-term care: Demonstration of effectiveness in managed care. Journal of the American Geriatric Society, 46(4), 506–510.
Card, S. J., Herrling, P. J., Matthews, J. L., Rossi, M. L., Spencer, E. S., & Lagoe, R. (1998). Impact of clinical pathways for total hip



replacement: A community-based analysis. Journal of Nursing Care Quality, 13(2), 67–76.
Carmen, K., Lawrence, W., & Siegel, J. (2019, March 5). fte new healthcare consumerism. Health Affairs. https://doi.org/10.1377
/hblog20190304.69786
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2016). Nursing home data compendium 2015 edition.  https://www.cms.gov/Medicare
/Provider-Enrollment-and-Certification/CertificationandComplianc
/Downloads/nursinghomedatacompendium_508-2015.pdf
Cole, F. L., Mackey, T., & Lindenberg, J. (1999). Search and research. Quality improvement: Psychometric evaluation of patient satisfac- tion with nurse practitioner care instrument. Journal of the Ameri- can Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 11(11), 471–475. [Classic]
Commonwealth Fund. (2020). New national scorecard on U.S. health system performance. http://www.commonwealthfund.org/Topics
/Health-System-Performance-and-Costs.aspx/
Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anesthesia Educational Programs. (2019). Accreditation, standards, policies and procedures and guidelines.
Coward, D. D. (1998). Facilitation of self-transcendence in a breast cancer support group. Oncology Nursing Forum, 25(1), 75–84.
Cubanski, J., & Kline, J. (2002). Improving health care quality: Can federal efforts lead the way? (Issue Brief No. 539). fte Common- wealth Fund.
Dahle, K., Smith, T., Ingersoll, R., & Wilson, J. (1998). Impact of a nurse practitioner on the costs of managing in-patients with heart failure. American Journal of Cardiology, 82(5), 686–688.
Davis, K., Schoenbaum, S. C., Collins, K. S., Tenny, K., Hughes, D., & Audet, A. J. (2002). Room for improvement: Patients report on the quality of their health care. fte Commonwealth Fund.
Diers, D., & Bozzo, J. (1997). Nursing resource definition in DRGs: RIMS/nursing acuity project. Nursing Economics, 15(3), 124–137.
Diers, D., Bozzo, J., Blatt, L., & Roussel, M. (1998). Understanding nursing resources in intensive care: A case study. American Journal of Critical Care, 7(2), 143–148.
Donabedian, A. (1966). Evaluating the quality of medical care. Mil- bank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 44(Suppl. 3), 166–206. [Classic]
Donaldson, M. S. (Ed.). (1999). Measuring the quality of health care. National Roundtable on Health Care Quality, Institute of Medi- cine. [Classic]
Dozier, A. M., Kitzman, H. J., Ingersoll, G. L., Holmberg, S., & Schultz, A. W. (2001). Development of an instrument to measure patient perception of the quality of nursing care. Research in Nurs- ing and Health, 24(6), 506–517.
Duffy, J. R. (2002). fte clinical leadership role of the CNS in the identification of nursing-sensitive and multi-disciplinary quality indicator sets. Clinical Nurse Specialist, 16(2), 70–76.
Dunbar-Jacob, J., & Schron, E. (2002). Ancillary studies in clinical trials. Nursing Research, 51(5), 336–338.
East, C. E., & Colditz, P. B. (1996). Women’s evaluations of their ex- periences with fetal intrapartum oxygen saturation monitoring and participation in a research project. Midwifery, 12(2), 93–97.

Foundation for Accountability. (1999). The FACCT consumer information framework. http://www.facct.org/FACC/doclibfiles
/documentfile_203.doc. [Classic]
Fulmer, T., Mate, K. S., & Berman, A. (2018). fte age friendly health system imperative. Journal of the American Geriatric Society, 66(1), 22–24.
Funk, C. (2020, February 12). Key findings about American’s confi- dence in science and their views of scientists’ roles in society. https:// www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/02/12/key-findings-about- americans-confidence-in-science-and-their-views-on-scientists- role-in-society
Garvisan, L., Grimsey, E., Littlejohns, P., Lownes, S., & Sacks, N. (1998). Satisfaction with clinical nurse specialists in a breast care clinic: Questionnaire survey. British Medical Journal, 316(7136), 976–977.
Girouard, S. A. (2000). New directions for the advanced practice nurse in health care quality. In A. B. Hamric, J. A. Spross, &
C. M. Hanson (Eds.), Advanced practice nursing: An integrative ap- proach (2nd ed., pp. 755–795). W. B. Saunders.
Girouard, S. A., & Spross, J. A. (1983). Evaluation of the CNS: Using an evaluation tool. In A. B. Hamric & J. A. Spross (Eds.), The clinical nurse specialist in theory and practice (pp. 207–218). Grune & Stratton. [Classic]
Hamric, A. B. (1983). A model for developing evaluation strategies. In A. B. Hamric & J. A. Spross (Eds.), The clinical nurse specialist in theory and practice (pp. 187–206). Grune & Stratton. [Classic]
Hamric, A. B. (1989). A model for CNS evaluation. In A. B. Hamric & J. A. Spross (Eds.), The clinical nurse specialist in theory and prac- tice (2nd ed., pp. 83–104). Grune & Stratton. [Classic]
Hamric, A. B., Worley, D., Lindeback, S., & Jaubert, S. (1999). Outcomes associated with advanced nursing practice prescriptive authority. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 10(3), 113–118.
Hansen-Turton, T., Ware, J., Bond, L., Doria, N., & Cunningham,
P. (2013). Are managed care organizations in the United States impending the delivery of primary care by nurse practitioners? A 2012 update on managed care organization credentialing and reimbursement practices. Population Health Management, 16(5), 306–309. https://doi.org/10,1089/pop/2012.0107
Hero, J. O., Blendon, R. J., Zaslavsky, A. M., & Campbell, A. L. (2016). Health system satisfaction: Understanding what makes Americans dissatisfied with their healthcare system: An interna- tional comparison. Health Affairs, 35, 502–509.
Holley, S. L. (2016). Ongoing professional performance evaluation: Advanced practice registered nurse practice competency assess- ment. The Journal for Nurse Practitioners,12(2), 67–74.
Houston, S., & Luquire, R. (1991). Measuring success: CNS perfor- mance appraisal. Clinical Nurse Specialist, 5(4), 204–209.
Ingersoll, G. L. (1988). Evaluating the impact of the clinical nurse specialist. Clinical Nurse Specialist, 2(3), 150–155.
Institute of Health Improvement. (2016). Vision, mission and value.
http://www.ihi.org/about/pages/ihivisionandvalues.aspx



Institute of Medicine. (1999). To err is human: Building a safer health system. National Academies Press. [Classic]
Institute of Medicine. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm. National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2003). Health professions education: A bridge to quality. National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2006). Preventing medical errors. National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2010). Redesigning continuing education in the health professions. National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. National Academies Press.
Jacavone, J. B., Daniels, R. D., & Tyner, I. (1999). CNS facilitation of a cardiac surgery clinical pathway program. Clinical Nurse Special- ist, 13(3), 126–132.
Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations. (2002). Health care at the crossroads: Strategies for addressing the evolving nursing crisis.
Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations. (2016). About the Joint Commission.
Kearnes, D. R. (1992). A productivity tool to evaluate NP practice: Monitoring clinical time spent in reimbursable, patient-related ac- tivities. Nurse Practitioner, 17(4), 50–52, 55.
Kee, C. C., & Borchers, L. (1998). Reducing readmission rates through discharge interventions. Clinical Nurse Specialist, 12(5),  206–209.
Kilpatrick, K., Tchouaket, É, Jabbour, M., & Haines, S. (2020). A mixed methods quality improvement study to implement nurse practitioner roles and improve care for residents in long-term care facilities. BMC Nursing, 19, 6. https://doi.org/10.1186
/s12912-019-0395-2
Knaus, V. L., Felten, S., Burton, S., Fobes, P., & Davis, K. (1997). fte use of nurse practitioners in the acute care setting. Journal of Nursing Administration, 27(2), 20–27. [Classic]
Larrabee, J. H., Ferri, J. A., & Hartig, M. T. (1997). Patient satisfac- tion with nurse practitioner care in primary care. Journal of Nursing Care Quality, 11(5), 9–14. [Classic]
Lombness, P. (1994). Differences in length of stay with care managed by a clinical nurse specialist or physician assistants. Clinical Nurse Specialist, 8(5), 253–260.
Lorenzetti, L. (2015, December 16). Here’s how your healthcare is going to change in 2016. Fortune. https://fortune.com/2015/12/16
/health-care-trends-2016
Mason, D. J., Alexander, J. M., Huffaker, J., Reilly, P. A., Sigmund, E. C., & Cohen, S. S. (1999). Nurse practitioners’ experiences with managed care organizations in New York and Connecticut. Nurs- ing Outlook, 47(5), 201–208.
McDaniel, A. M. (1999). Assessing the feasibility of a clinical practice guideline for inpatient smoking cessation intervention. Clinical Nurse Specialist, 13(5), 228–235.
McMullen, M. (1999). Satisfaction of patients, physicians and staff nurses with the care provided by nurse practitioners/attending collaborative

service [Conference session]. 11th Annual Scientific Sessions East- ern Nursing Research Society Meeting, New York, NY, United States.
Melynk, B. M., Gallagher-Ford, L., Long, L. E., & Fineout-Overholt, E. (2014). fte establishment of evidence-based practice competen- cies for practicing registered nurses and advanced practice nurses in real-world clinical settings: Proficiencies to improve healthcare quality, reliability, patient outcomes, and costs. Worldviews on Evi- dence Based Nursing, 11(1), 5–15.
Morin, K. H., Bucher, L., Plowfield, L., Hayes, E., Mahoney, P., & Armiger, L. (1999). Using research to establish protocols for prac- tice: A statewide study of acute care agencies. Clinical Nurse Spe- cialist, 13(2), 77–84. [Classic]
Mundinger, M. O., & Kane, R. L. (2000). Health outcomes among patients treated by nurse practitioners or physicians. Journal of the American Medical Association, 283(19), 2521–2524.
Musclow, S. L., Sawhney, M., & Watt-Watson, J. (2002). fte emerg- ing role of advanced practice nursing in acute pain management throughout Canada. Clinical Nurse Specialist, 12(2), 63–68.
National Board of Certification and Recertification of Registered Nurse Anesthetists. (2016). Background and history of the CPC program.
National Committee for Quality Assurance. (2011). HEDIS and qual- ity measurement. http://www.ncqa.org/tabid/59/Default.aspx/
National Committee for Quality Assurance. (2020). HEDIS and qual- ity measurement. http://www.ncqa.org/tabid/59/Default.aspx/
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2008). Consensus model for nursing education: Licensure, accreditation, certification and education.
National Forum for Healthcare Quality Measurement and Reporting. (2016). About the National Quality Forum. http://www.qualityforum
.org/About_NQF/
National Organization of Nurse Practitioner Faculties. (2018). Nurse practitioner core competencies.
Naylor, M. D., & Kurtzman, E. T. (2010). fte role of nurse practi- tioners in reinventing primary care. Health Affairs, 29(5), 893–899.
Needleman, J., Buerhaus, P.  I., Mattke, S., Stewart, M., & Zelevinsky,
K. (2002). Nurse-staffing levels and the quality of care in hospitals.
New England Journal of Medicine, 346(22), 1715.
Needleman, J., & Minnick, A. F. (2008). Anesthesia provider model, hospital resources, and maternal outcomes. Health Services Re- search. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-6773.2008.00919.x
Noll, M. L., & Girard, N. (1993). Preparing the CNS for participa- tion in quality assurance activities. Clinical Nurse Specialist, 7(2), 81–84.
Oermann, M. H. (1999). Consumer’s descriptions of health care qual- ity. Journal of Nursing Care Quality, 14(1), 47–55. [Classic]
Oermann, M. H., Lambert, J., & Templin, T. (2000). Patients’ percep- tions of quality health care. MCN, American Journal of Maternal Child Nursing, 25(5), 242–247.
Paine, L. L., Lang, J. M., Strobino, D. M., Johnson, T. R., DeJoseph,
J. F., Declercq, E. R., Gagnon, D. R., Sculphome, A., & Ross, A.



(1999). Characteristics of nurse-midwife patients and visits. Amer- ican Journal of Public Health, 89(6), 906–909.
Pelletier-Hibbert, M. (1998). Coping strategies used by nurses to deal with the care of organ donors and their families. Heart and Lung, 27(4), 230–237.
Pine, M., Holt, K. D., & Lou, Y. B. (2003). Surgical mortality and type of anesthesia provider. Journal of American Association of Nurse Anesthetists, 71(2), 109–116.
Rosen, A. K. & Chen, P. (2016, June 13). Measuring patient safety events: Opportunities and challenges. AHRQ National Quality Clearinghouse.https://www.qualitymeasures.ahrq.gov/expert/expert- commentary/50301/measuring-patient-safety-events-op
Rudy, E. B., Davidson, L. J., Daly, B., Clochesy, J. M., Sereida, S., Baldisseri, M., Hravnak, M., Ross, T., & Ryan, C. (1998). Care activities and outcomes of patients cared for by acute care nurse practitioners, physician assistants and resident physicians: A com- parison. American Journal of Critical Care, 7(4), 267–281.
Sagehorn, K. K., Russell, C. L., & Ganong, L. H. (1999). Implemen- tation of a patient-family pathway: Effects on patients and families. Clinical Nurse Specialist, 13(3), 119–122. [Classic]
Shaughnessy, P. W., Crisler, K. S., Hittle, D. F., & Schenkler, R. E. (2002). Summary of the report on OASIS and outcome-based quality improvement in home care. Center for Health Services Research, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center.
Simonson, D. C., Ahern, M. M., & Hendryx, M. S. (2007). Anesthe- sia staffing and anesthetic complications during cesarean delivery: a retrospective analysis. Nursing Research, 56(1), 9–17.
Stanick-Hutt, J., Newhouse, R. P., White, K. M., Johantgen, M., Bass,
E. B., Zangaro, G., Wilson, R., Fountain, L., Steinwachs, D. M., Heindel, L., & Weiner, J.P. (2013). fte quality and effectiveness of care provided by nurse practitioners. The Journal for Nurse Prac- titioners, 9(8), 492–500.
Strohschein, S., Schaffer, M. A., & Lia-Hoagberg, B. (1999). Evidenced-based guidelines for public health nursing practice. Nursing Outlook, 47(2), 84–90. [Classic]
Tierney, M. J., Grant, L. M., & Mazique, S. I. (1990). Cost account- ability and clinical nurse specialist evaluation. Nursing Manage- ment, 21(5), 26–28, 30–31. [Classic]
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration, Bureau of Health Professions, Divi- sion of Nursing. (2002). Nurse practitioner primary care competen- cies in specialty areas. U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2011). Partnership for patients: Better care, lower costs. http://www.healthcare.gov/compare
/partnership-for-patients/index.html
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2019). Healthy peo- ple, 2030. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/healthy_people.htm/
Walker, P. H., Baker, J. J., & Chivertons, P. (1998). Costs of interdisci- plinary practice in a school-based health center. Outcomes Manage- ment for Nursing Practice, 2(1), 37–44.
Whitington, J. W., Nolan, K., Lewis, N., & Torres, T. (2015). Pursuing the triple aim: fte first 7 years. The Millbank Quarterly, 93(2), 263–300.

Woo, B. F. Y., Lee, J. X. Y., & Tam, W. W. S. (2017). fte impact of the advanced practice nursing role on quality of care, clinical out- comes, patient satisfaction, and cost in the emergency and critical care settings: a systematic review. Human Resources for Health, 15, 63. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12960-017-0237-9
World Health Organization, UNICEF. (2018). Protecting, promot- ing, and supporting breast feeding in facilities providing maternity and newborn services: The revised Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative 2018 Implementation Guidance. https://www.who.int/nutrition/ publications/infantfeeding/bfhi-implementation/en/

CHAPTER 25
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2004). Position state- ment on the practice doctorate in nursing. https://www.aacnnursing
.org/Portals/42/News/Position-Statements/DNP.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2006). The essentials of doctoral education for advanced nursing practice. https://www
    .aacnnursing.org/Portals/42/Publications/DNPEssentials.pdf American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2015). The doctor of nurs-
ing practice: Current Issues and clarifying recommendations. https://
www.aacnnursing.org/Portals/42/DNP/DNP-Implementation
.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2019). Factsheet: The doctor of nursing practice (DNP). https://www.aacnnursing.org
/DNP/Fact-Sheet
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (n.d.). CRNAs at a glance. https://www.anesthesiafacts.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/04
/CRNAs_At_A_Glance.pdf
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2016). AANA statement on the most cost-effective and safe anesthesia practice models, position statement. https://www.aana.com/docs/default-source/practice-aana- com-web-documents-(all)/professional-practice-manual/aana- statement-on-the-most-cost-effective-and-safeanesthesia-practice- models.pdf?sfvrsn=270649b1_4
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2019). CRNA fact sheet. https://www.aana.com/membership/become-a-crna/crna-fact-sheet
American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2020a). Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) general provider tele- health  and  telemedicine  toolkit.  https://www.aanp.org/practice
/practice-management/technology/telehealth
American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2020b). NP facts.
    https://storage.aanp.org/www/documents/NPFacts 021920.pdf American College of Nurse Midwives. (2019). Essential facts about mid-
wives.   https://www.midwife.org/acnm/files/cclibraryfiles/filename
   /000000007531/EssentialFactsAboutMidwives-UPDATED.pdf American Nurses Credentialing Center. (2019). 2019 Magnet applica-
tion manual. American Nurses Association.
APRN Consensus Work Group & National Council of State Board of Nurses Advisory Committee. (2008). Consensus model for APRN regulation: Licensure, accreditation, certification and education. https://www.aacnnursing.org/Portals/42/AcademicNursing/pdf
/APRNReport.pdf



Bednash, G., Breslin, E. T., Kirschling, J. M., & Rosseter, R. J. (2014). PhD or DNP: Planning for doctoral nursing educa- tion. Nursing Science Quarterly, 27(4), 296–301. https://doi.org
/10.1177/0894318414546415
Benitez, J., Coplan, B., Dehn, R. W., & Hooker, R. S. (2015). Pay- ment source and provider type in the US healthcare system. Jour- nal of the American Academy of Physician Assistants, 28(3), 46–53. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.JAA.0000460924.36251.eb
Boland, M. G., & Loos, J. R. (2020). Spotlight on nursing: fte doctor of nursing practice (DNP): Preparing Hawai’i’s nursing care pro- viders. Hawai’i Journal of Health & Social Welfare, 79(6), 204–205. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32524100; https://www.ncbi
.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7281346/
Brown-Benedict, D. J. (2008). fte doctor of nursing practice degree: Lessons from the history of the professional doctorate in other health disciplines. Journal of Nursing Education, 47(10), 448–457.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019a). Nurse anesthetists, nurse midwives, and nurse practitioners. https://www.bls.gov/ooh/healthcare/nurse- anesthetists-nurse-midwives-and-nurse-practitioners.htm
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019b, May). Occupational employment and wages: Nurse anesthetists. https://www.bls.gov/oes/current
/oes291151.htm
Campaign for Nursing. (2020). Campaign for Action dashboard. https://campaignforaction.org/resource/dashboard-indicators/
Carlson, N. S., Neal, J. L., Tilden, E. L., Smith, D. C., Breman, R. B., Lowe, N. K., Dietrich, M. S., & Phillippi, J. C. (2019). Influence of midwifery presence in United States centers on labor care and outcomes of low-risk parous women: A consortium on safe labor study. Birth, 46(3), 487–499. https://doi.org/10.1111/birt.12405
Cawley, J. F., Cawthon, E., & Hooker, R. S. (2012). Origins of the physician assistant movement in the United States. Journal of the American Academy of Physician Assistants, 25(12), 36–40, 42. https://doi.org/10.1097/01720610-201212000-00008
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. (2020a). Home health agencies: CMS flexibilities to fight COVID-19. https://www.cms.gov
/files/document/covid-home-health-agencies.pdf
Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services. (2020b). Summary Covid-19 emergency declaration waivers. https://www.cms.gov/files
    /document/summary-covid-19-emergency-declaration-waivers.pdf
Chaney, A. J., & Yataco, M. L. (2019). fte emerging role of nurse practitioners and physician assistants in liver transplantation. Liver Transplant, 25(7), 1105–1109. https://doi.org/10.1002/lt.25474
Cimiotti, J. P., Li, Y., Sloane, D. M., Barnes, H., Brom, H. M., & Aiken, L. H. (2019). Regulation of the nurse practitioner work- force: Implications for care across settings. Journal of Nursing Reg- ulation, 10(2), 31–37.
Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education. (2009). Achieving ex- cellence in accreditation. http://www.aacnnursing.org/Portals/42
/CCNE/PDF/CCNE-History.pdf
Commission on Social Determinants of Health. (2008). Closing the gap in a generation: Health equity through action on the social de- terminants of health. Final Report of the Commission on Social

Determinants of Health. https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle
/10665/43943/9789241563703_eng.pdf?sequence=1
Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anesthesia Educational Program. (2020). Position statement on doctoral education for nurse anesthe- tists. https://www.coacrna.org/about-coa/position-statements/
Cowan, L., Hartjes, T., & Munro, S. (2019). A model of successful DNP and PhD collaboration. Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, 31(2), 116–123. https://doi.org/10.1097
/JXX.0000000000000105
Cronenwett, L., Dracup, K., Grey, M., McCauley, L., Meleis, A., & Salmon, M. (2011). fte doctor of nursing practice: A national workforce perspective. Nursing Outlook, 59(1), 9–17. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.outlook.2010.11.003
Cygan, H. R., & Reed, M. (2019). DNP and PhD scholarship: Mak- ing the case for collaboration. Journal of Professional Nursing, 35(5), 353–357.
Davidson, J. E., Morse, M. A., Yi, C., & Hellyar, M. C. (2017). As- sessing outcomes in clinical nurse specialist practice. In R. Klein- pell (Ed.), Outcome assessment in advanced practice nursing (4th ed.,
p. 157). Springer.
Dubree, M., Jones, P., Kapu, A., & Parmley, C. L. (2015). APRN practice: Challenges, empowerment and outcomes. Nurse Leader, 13(2). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mnl.2015.01.007
Duffy, M. E. (2015). Evaluating nursing research in professional prac- tice. . In J. Ives Erickson, M. Ditomassi, & D. A. Jones (Eds.), Fostering a research intensive environment (pp. 159–190). Sigma fteta Tau.
Erickson, J. I., Ditomassi, M., & Jones, D. A. (2015). Fostering a re- search-intensive organization, 2015 AJN award recipient: An inter- disciplinary approach for nurses from Massachusetts General Hospital. Sigma fteta Tau.
Faraz, A., & Salsberg, E. (2019). From education to practice: What we can learn about the workforce from a survey of new nurse practitioners. Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, 31(8), 454–461. https://doi.org/10.1097
/JXX.0000000000000226
Francis, D. (2017). Improving care coordination: Impact of a doctorate of nursing practice prepared clinical nurse specialist [Abstract]. https:// sigma.nursingrepository.org/handle/10755/622090
Franco, M. (2020, April 4, 2020). Expansion of telehealth during the COVID19   emergency.  https://pdf.hklaw.com/pdfrenderer.svc/v1
/abcpdf11/GetRenderedPdfByUrl/Expansion%20of 
%20Telehealth%20D uring%20the%20CO VID19 
%20Emergency.pdf/?url=http%3a%2f%2fwww.hklaw.com%2fen
%2finsights%2fpublications%2f2020%2f03%2fexpansion- of-telehealth-during-the-covid19-emergency%3fpdf%3d1
Fulton, J. S. (2010). Evolution of clinical nurse specialist role and practice in the United States. In K. A. Goudreau, J. S. Fulton, &
K. L. Swartzell (Eds.), Foundations of clinical nurse specialist practice
(3rd ed., pp. 1–13). Springer. [Classic]
Genova, L. (2019). APN-ledcare coordination to improve discharge facil- itation. https://go.openathens.net/redirector/bc.edu?url=https:



//www.proquest.com/dissertationstheses/apn-led-care- coordination-improve-discharge/docview/2370001904 
/se2?accountid=9673
Grace, P. J., Willis, D. G., Roy, C., & Jones, D. A. (2016). Profession at the crossroads: A dialog concerning the preparation of nursing scholars and leaders. Nursing Outlook, 64(1), 61–70. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.outlook.2015.10.002
Greene, J., El-Banna, M. M., Briggs, L. A., & Park, J. (2017). Gender differences in nurse practitioner salaries. Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, 29(11), 667–672. https://doi
.org/10.1002/2327-6924.12512
Guttmacher Institute. (2020, June 1). Nurses’ authority to prescribe or dispense. https://www.guttmacher.org/state-policy/explore/nurses- authority-prescribe-or-dispense
Herdman, T. H., & Kamitsuru, S. (2018). NANDA international nurs- ing diagnoses: Definitions & classifications (11th ed.). ftieme.
Hogan, P. F., Seifert, R. F., Moore, C. S., & Simonson, B. E. (2010). Cost effectiveness analysis of anesthesia providers. Nursing Econom- ics, 28(3), 159.
Hooker, R. S., Brock, D. M., & Cook, M. L. (2016). Characteristics of nurse practitioners and physician assistants in the United States. Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, 28(1), 39–46. https://doi.org/10.1002/2327-6924.12293
Hurlock-Chorostecki, C., Forchuk, C., Orchard, C., van Soeren, M., & Reeves, S. (2014). Hospital-based nurse practitioner roles and interprofessional practice: a scoping review. Nursing & Health Sci- ences, 16(3), 403–410. https://doi.org/10.1111/nhs.12107
Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Initiative on the Future of Nursing, at the Institute of Medicine. (2011). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. National Academies Press (US). https://doi.org/10.1097
/JXX.0000000000000029.
International Council of Nurses. (2020). Guidelines on advanced prac- tice nursing, 2020. https://www.icn.ch/system/files/documents
/2020- 04/ICN_APN%20Report_EN_WEB.pdf
Ives Erickson, J., & Ditomassi, M. (2013). Innovation in care delivery. In J. Ives Erickson, D. Jones, & M. Ditomassi (Eds.), Fostering nurse-led care (pp. 153–172). Sigma fteta Tau International.
Ives Erickson, J., Duffy, M. E., Ditomassi, M., & Jones, D. (2017). Development and psychometric evaluation of the profes- sional practice work environment inventory. Journal of Nurs- ing Administration, 47(5), 259–265. https://doi.org/10.1097
/NNA.0000000000000476
Johal, J., & Dodd, A. (2017). Physician extenders on surgical services: A systematic review. Canadian Journal of Surgery, 60(3), 172–178. https://doi.org/10.1503/cjs.001516
Jones, D. (2013). Nurse–patient relationship: Knowledge transforming care at the bedside. In J. Ives Erickson, D. Jones, & M. Ditomassi (Eds.), Fostering nurse-led care (pp. 85–121). Sigma fteta Tau International.
Jones, D., Lunney, M., Keenan, G., & Moorhead, S. (2010). Stan- dardized nursing languages: Essential for the nursing workforce.

Annual Review of Nursing Research, 28, 253–294. https://doi
.org/10.1891/0739-6686.28.253 [Classic]
Kaplan, L. (2018). ICN NP/APNN 2018 conference advances the NP role globally. The Nurse Practitioner, 43(12), 7–8. https://doi
.org/10.1097/01.NPR.0000547549.71388.af
Kleinpell, R., Cook, M. L., & Padden, D. L. (2018). American Asso- ciation of Nurse Practitioners National Nurse Practitioner sample survey: Update on acute care nurse practitioner practice. Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, 30(3), 140–149. https://doi.org/10.1097/JXX.0000000000000030
Kurtzman, E. T., & Barnow, B. S. (2017). A comparison of nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and primary care physicians’ patterns of practice and quality of care in health centers. Medical Care, 55(6), 615–622.
Loewenberg Weisband, Y., Klebanoff, M., Gallo, M. F., Shoben, A., & Norris, A. H. (2018). Birth outcomes of women using a midwife versus women using a physician for prenatal care. Jour- nal of Midwifery & Women’s Health, 63(4), 399–409. https://doi
.org/10.1111/jmwh.12750
Mafi, J. N., Wee, C. C., Davis, R. B., & Landon, B. E. (2016). Com- paring use of low-value health care services among U.S. advanced practice clinicians and physicians. Annals of Internal Medicine, 165(4), 237–244. https://doi.org/10.7326/M15-2152
Mason, D. J., Jones, D. A., Roy, C., Sullivan, C. G., & Wood, L. J. (2015). Commonalities of nurse-designed models of health care. Nursing Outlook, 63(5), 540–553. https://doi.org/10.1016
/j.outlook.2015.04.009
Massachusetts General Hospital Patient Care Services. (2011). Journey of care framework—Continuum of care. [Classic]
Mauro, A. M. P., Tracey, D. L., LoGrippo, M. T., Brienza-Arcilla, D., Williams-Gregory, M., Shugg, S., Bravo, A., & Byrne, C. (2018). Innovative PhD-DNP faculty collaboration to advance bacca- laureate student population health competencies. Nursing Edu- cation Perspectives, 39(5), 305–308. https://doi.org/10.1097/01
.Nep.0000000000000377
Minnick, A. F., Kleinpell, R., & Allison, T. L. (2019). DNPs’ la- bor participation, activities, and reports of degree contribu- tions. Nursing Outlook, 67(1), 89–100. https://doi.org/10.1016
/j.outlook.2018.10.008
Mohr, L. D., &  Coke,  L.  A.  (2018).  Distinguishing  the  clini- cal nurse specialist from other graduate nursing roles. Clini- cal Nurse Specialist, 32(3), 139–151. https://doi.org/10.1097
/NUR.0000000000000373
Mola, A. (2018). fte nurse practitioner role in United States of Amer- ica within transitional care and care coordination models. Cultura del cuidado, 15(2), 14–26.
Morgan, P. A., Smith, V. A., Berkowitz, T. S. Z., Edelman, D., Van Houtven, C. H., Woolson, S. L., Hendrix, C. C., Everett,
C. M., White, B. S., & Jackson, G. L. (2019). Impact of physi- cians, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants on utilization and costs for complex patients. Health Affairs (Millwood), 38(6), 1028–1036. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2019.00014



Mundinger, M. O., & Carter, M. A. (2019). Potential crisis in nurse practitioner preparation in the United States. Policy, Poli- tics, & Nursing Practice, 20(2), 57–63. https://doi.org/10.1177
/1527154419838630
Murphy, M. P., Staffileno, B. A., & Carlson, E. (2015). Collaboration among DNP- and PhD-prepared nurses: Opportunity to drive positive change. Journal of Professional Nursing, 31(5), 388–394. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.profnurs.2015.03.001
National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists. (n.d.). Key findings from the 2018 clinical nurse specialists census. https://nacns.org
/professional-resources/practice-and-cns-role/cns-census/
National Organization of Nurse Practitioner Faculties. (2017). The doctor of nursing practice summit—Proceedings. https://cdn.ymaws
.com/www.nonpf.org/resource/resmgr/fte_Doctor_of_Nursing_ Practi.pdf
Newman, M. A., Smith, M. C., Pharris, M. D., & Jones, D. (2008). fte focus of the discipline revisited. ANS Advances in Nursing Science, 31(1), E16–27. https://doi.org/10.1097/01
.ANS.0000311533.65941.f1 [Classic]
Nickasch, B. L., Lehr, M. M., Schmidt, B., Henne, T., & Wippich, C. (2018). Current perceptions: fte DNP–PhD divide. Journal of Doctoral Nursing Practice, 11(2), 107–113.
Quella, A., Brock, D. M., & Hooker, R. S. (2015). Physician assis- tant wages and employment, 2000-2025. Journal of the American Academy of Physician Assistants, 28(6), 56–58, 60–53. https://doi
.org/10.1097/01.JAA.0000465222.98395.0c
Renfrew, M. (2017). Midwifery matters. In B. Murray-Davis, E. Hut- ton, E. Carty, K. Kaufman, & M. Butler (Eds.), Comprehensive midwifery: The role of the midwife in health care practice, education, and research. fte e-Book Foundry @ McMaster University.
Roberson, J. (2020). AAPA 2019 salary report shows compensation remains in step with growth of PA workforce. https://www.aapa
.org/news-central/2019/08/aapa-2019-salary-report-shows- compensation-remains-in-step-with-growth-of-pa-workforce/
Rohrer, J. E., Garrison, G. M., & Angstman, K. B. (2012). Early re- turn visits by pediatric primary care patients with otitis media: A retail nurse practitioner clinic versus standard medical office care. Quality Management in Health Care, 21(1), 44–47. https://doi
.org/10.1097/QMH.0b013e3182418157
Rutledge, C. M., Kott, K., Schweickert, P. A., Poston, R., Fowler, C., & Haney, T. S. (2017). Telehealth and eHealth in nurse practitioner training: current perspectives. Advances in Medical Education and Practice, 8, 399–409. https://doi.org/10.2147/AMEP.S116071
Schober, M. (2018). Global emergence of nurse practitioner/advanced practice nursing roles. Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, 30(4), 182–184.
Smiley, R. A., Lauer, P., Bienemy, C., Berg, J. G., Shireman, E., Reneau, K. A., & Alexander, M. (2018). fte 2017 national nurs- ing workforce survey. Journal of Nursing Regulation, 9(3), S1–S88. https://doi.org/10.1016/s2155-8256(18)30131-5
Smith, M. C. (2019). Regenerating nursing’s disciplinary perspective.
Advances in Nursing Science, 42(1), 3–16. https://doi.org/10.1097
/ans.0000000000000241

Stanik-Hutt, J., Newhouse, R. P., White, K. M., Johantgen, M., Bass, E. B., Zangaro, G., Wilson, R., Fountain, L., Steinwachs,
D. M., Heindel, L., & Weiner, J. P. (2013). fte quality and effectiveness of care provided by nurse practitioners. The Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 9(8), 492–500.e413. https://doi.org/10.1016
/j.nurpra.2013.07.004
Stokowski, L., McBride, M., & Berry, E. (2019, November 6). Med- scape  APRN  compensation  report  2019. https://www.medscape
   .com/slideshow/2019-aprn-compensation-report-6012127#26 fte Lewin Group. (2016). Update of cost effectiveness of anesthesia
providers.        http://www.lewin.com/content/dam/Lewin/Resources
/AANA-CEA-May2016.pdf
Trautman, D., Idzik, S., Hammersla, M., & Rosseter, R. (2018). Ad- vancing scholarship through translational research: fte role of PhD and DNP prepared nurses. OJIN: The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 23(2, Manuscript 2). https://doi.org/10.3912/OJIN
.Vol23No02Man02
Tussing, T. E., Brinkman, B., Francis, D., Hixon, B., Labardee, R., & Chipps, E. (2018). fte impact of the doctorate of nurs- ing practice nurse in a hospital setting. The Journal of Nurs- ing Administration, 48(12), 600–602. https://doi.org/10.1097
/NNA.0000000000000688
Udlis, K. A., & Mancuso, J. M. (2015). Perceptions of the role of the doctor of nursing practice-prepared nurse: Clarity or confusion. Journal of Professional Nursing, 31(4), 274–283.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2020a). Nurse anesthetists, nurse midwives, and nurse practitioners: Occupational outlook handbook. https://www
.bls.gov/OOH/healthcare/nurse-anesthetists-nurse-midwives- and-nurse-practitioners.htm#tab-6
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2020b, April 10). Occupational outlook handbook: Physician assistants. https://www.bls.gov/ooh
/healthcare/physician-assistants.htm
Ward-Smith, P., Peterson, J. A., & Kimble, S. (2014). Student nurse perception of doctoral graduate programs. Journal of Nursing Ed- ucation and Practice, 4(5). https://doi.org/10.5430/jnep.v4n5p36
Wieworka, J., Anderson, R., & Choflet, A. (2019). Using the clini- cal nurse specialist role to support integration and standardization across a multi-clinic department. International Journal of Radia- tion Oncology*Biology*Physics, 105(1). https://doi.org/10.1016
/j.ijrobp.2019.06.1309
Yang, Y., Long, Q., Jackson, S. L., Rhee, M. K., Tomolo, A., Olson, D., & Phillips, L. S. (2018). Nurse practitioners, physi- cian assistants, and physicians are comparable in managing the first five years of diabetes. The American Journal of Medicine, 131(3), 276–283, e272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2017.08.026

CHAPTER 26
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (n.d.). Easy to understand telehealth   consent   form. https://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files
   /wysiwyg/easy-to-understand-telehealth-consent-form.docx American Academy of Nurse Practitioners. (2013). Nurse practi-
tioner cost effectiveness. https://www.aanp.org/advocacy/advocacy-
resource/position-statements/position-statements



American Academy of Nurse Practitioners. (2020). 2020 nurse prac- titioner  state  practice  environment.   https://storage.aanp.org/www
   /documents/advocacy/State-Practice-Environment-2020.pdf American Medical Association, Advocacy Resource Center. (2018).
Establishment of the patient-physician relationship via telemedi-
cine. https://www.ama-assn.org/system/files/2018-10/ama-chart- telemedicine-patient-physician-relationship.pdf
Brassard, A., & Smolenski, M. (2011). Removing barriers to advanced practice registered nurse care: Hospital privileges. AARP Public Policy Institute Insight on Issues, 55. https://assets.aarp.org/rgcenter
/ppi/health-care/insight55.pdf
Breen, G., Selby, J., & Hills, B. (2015). Post-implementation ICD-10 challenges. Managed Healthcare Executive. http:// managedhealthcareexecutive.modernmedicine.com/managed- healthcare-executive/news/post-implementation-icd-10-challenges
Brown, D. J. (2007). Consumer perspectives on nurse practitioners and independent practice. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 19(10). 523–529.
Browie, B., DeSocio, J., & Swanson, K. (2019). fte DNP degree: Are we producing the graduates we intended? The Journal of Nursing Administration, 49(5), 280–285.
Carzoli, R., Martinez-Cruz, M., Cuevas, L., Murphy, S., & Chui, T. (1994). Comparison of neonatal nurse practitioners, physician as- sistants, and residents in the neonatal intensive care unit. Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 148(12), 1271–1276.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. (2020). Medicare telehealth frequently  asked  questions. https://edit.cms.gov/files/document
    /medicare-telehealth-frequently-asked-questions-faqs-31720.pdf Cleveland, K. A., Motter, T., & Smith, Y. (2019). Affordable care:
Harnessing the power of nurses. The Online Journal of Issues in
Nursing,    24(2).    https://ojin.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories
/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents
/Vol-24-2019/No2-May-2019/Affordable-Care.html
Cohen, R., Terlizzi, E., Martinez, M., & Cha, A. (2020). Health in- surance coverage: Early release of estimates from the national health interview survey, January-June 2019. National Center for Health Statistics. https://www.cdc.gov/nhis/healthinsurancecoverae.htm
Cronenwett, L., Dracup, K., Grey, M., McCauley, L., Meleis, A., & Salmon, M. (2011). fte doctor of nursing practice: A national workforce perspective. Nursing Outlook, 59(1), 9–17.
Ely, L. (2015). Nurse-managed clinics: Barriers and benefits toward financial sustainability when integrating primary care and mental health. Nursing Economics, 33(4), 193–202.
Englebright, J., McCurley, J., & Borum, C. (2017). fte emerging role of APRNs in hospital nursing practice. Nurse Leader, 15(6), 387–391.
Fain, J., Asselin, M., & McCurry, M. (2008). fte DNP . . . Why now?
Nursing Management, 39(7), 34–37.
Federation of State Medical Boards. (2020). Telemedicine policies. https:// www.fsmb.org/siteassets/advocacy/key-issues/telemedicine_ policies_by_state.pdf

Fleming, M., MaFarlane, D., Torres, W., & Duszak, R. (2015). Mag- nitude of impact, overall and on subspecialties, of transitioning in radiology from ICD-9 to ICD-10 codes. Journal of the American College of Radiology, 12(11), 1155–1161.
Gosfield, A. G. (2013, August). Understanding new payment models.
MedicalEconomics.http://medicaleconomics.modernmedicine.com
/medical-economics/content/tags/accountable-care-organization
/understanding-new-payment-models
Hain, D., Fleck, L. (2014, May 31). Barriers to nurse practitioner practice that impact healthcare redesign. The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 19 (2, Manuscript 2).
Jackson, R., Schneider, A., & Baum, N. (2011). Social media network- ing: YouTube and search engine optimization. Journal of Medical Practice Management, 26(4), 254–257.
Kaufman, B., Spivack, S., Stearns, S., Song, P., & O’Brien, E. (2019). Impact of accountable care organizations on utilization, care, and outcomes: A systematic review. Medical Care Research and Review, 76(3), 255–290.
King, E. S. (2008). A 10-year review of four academic nurse-managed centers: Challenges and survival strategies. Journal of Professional Nursing, 24(1), 14–20.
Kocher, R., Emanuel, E., & DeParle, N. (2010). fte Affordable Care Act and the future of clinical medicine: fte opportunities and challenges. Annals of Internal Medicine, 153(8), 536–539.
Kuo, D., McAllister, J., Rossignol, L., Turchi, R., & Stille, C. (2018). Care coordination for children with medical complexity: Whose care is it, anyway? Pediatrics, 141(3), 5224–5232.
Maley, C., & Baum, N. (2010). Getting to the top of Google: Search engine optimization. Journal of Medical Practice Management, 25(5), 301–303.
McWilliams, J., Hatfield, L., Chernew, M. Landon,B., & Schwartz,
A. (2016). Early performance of accountable care organizations in Medicare. New England Journal of Medicine, 374, 2357–2366.
Meleis, A. I., & Dracup, K. (2005). fte case against the DNP: His- tory, timing, substance, and marginalization. Online Journal of Is- sues in Nursing, 10(3).
Mirvis, D. (1999). fte behavior of physicians. In J. Johnson & A. Kil- patrick (Eds.), Handbook of health administration (pp. 439–460). Marcel Dekker.
Mundinger, M., Kane, R., Lentz, E., Totten, A. M., Tsai, W. Y., Cleary,
P. D., Friedewald, W. T., Siu, A. L., & Shelanski, M. L. (2000). Primary care outcomes in patients treated by nurse practitioners or physicians: A randomized trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 283(1), 59–68.
National Consortium of Telehealth Resource Centers (2019).
COVID-19  telehealth  toolkit. https://www.telehealthresourcecenter
.org/resource-documents/
Navathe, A., Sen, A., Rosenthal, M., Pearl, R., Ubel, P., Emanuel, E., & Volpp, K. (2016). New strategies for aligning physicians with health system incentives. American Journal of Managed Care, 22(9), 610–612.



Newhouse, R., Stanik-Hutt, J., White, K. M., Johantgen, M., Bass, E. B., Zangaro, G., Wilson, R. F., Fountain, L., Steinwachs, D. M., Heindel, L., & Weiner, J. P. (2011, September–October). Advanced practice nurse outcomes 1990–2008: A systematic review. Nurs- ing Economic$, 29(5), 230–250. https://www.nursingeconomics
.net/ce/2013/article3001021.pdf
Office of Technology Assessment. (1986). Nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and certified nurse-midwives: A policy analysis.
Pearson, L. (n.d.). fte Pearson report. American Journal of Nurse Prac- titioners, yearly. http://nursing.jbpub.com/pearsonreport/Login
.aspx?ref=/pearsonreport/Default.aspx
Rincon, T. (2019). How NPs can help expand telehealth ser- vices. The Nurse Practitioner, 44(11), 30–35. https://journals
.lww.com/tnpj/Fulltext/2019/11000/How_NPs_can_help
_expand_telehealth_services.7.aspx
Ritchie, A., Marbury, D., Verdon, D., Mazzolini, C., & Boyles, S. (2016). Shifting reimbursement models: fte risks and rewards for primary care. Medical Economics. http://medicaleconomics
.modernmedicine.com/medical-economics/content/tags
/aca/shifting-reimbursement-models-risks-and-rewards-primary- care?page=full&trendmd-shared=0
Schneider, A., Jackson, R., & Baum, N. (2010). Social media network- ing: Facebook and Twitter. Journal of Medical Practice Management, 26(3), 156–157.
Spitzer, W., Sackett, D., Sibley, J., Roberts, R. S., Gent, M., Kergin,
D. J., Hackett, B. C., & Olynich, A. (1974). fte Burlington ran- domized trial of the nurse practitioner. New England Journal of Medicine, 290(5), 251–256.
Steaban, R. (2016). Health care reform, care coordination, and transforma- tional leadership. Nursing Administration Quarterly, 40(2), 153–163.
Telehealth Resource Center. (2017). Telehealth 101: The basics. https:// www.telehealthresourcecenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/09
/Telehealth-101.pdf
Telehealth Resource Center. (2019-1). Key steps for creating a business pro- posal  to  implement  telemedicine. https://www.telehealthresourcecenter
   .org/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/15-Steps-Jan.-2019.pdf Telehealth Resource Center. (2019-2). HIPAA & telehealth, a stepwise
guide to compliance. https://www.telehealthresourcecenter.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/07/2019-HIPAA.pdf
Telehealth Resource Center. (2019-3). What is telehealth? https:// www.telehealthresourcecenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2019
/06/2019-Framing-Telehealth.pdf
Terry, K., Ritchie, A., Marbury, D., Smith, L., & Pofeldt, E. (2014). Top 5 financial challenges facing physicians in 2015. Medi- cal Economics. http://medicaleconomics.modernmedicine.com
/medical-economics/news/top-5-financial-challenges-facing- physicians-2015?page=0,0&trendmd-shared=1
Tuten, T., & Solomon, M. (2018). Social media marketing. Sage Publications.
USDHHS, Office for Civil Rights (n.d.). FAQs on telehealth and HIPAA during the COVID-19 nationwide public health emergency. https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/telehealth-faqs-508.pdf

Vincent, D., MacKay, T., Pohl, J., Hirth, R., & Oakley, D. (1999). A tale of two nursing centers: A cautionary study of profitability. Nursing Economics, 17(3), 257–262.
Ward, B. W., Clarke, T. C., Nugent, C. N., & Schiller, J. S. (2016). Early release of selected estimates based on data from the 2015 National Health Interview Survey. National Center for Health Sta- tistics. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis.htm
World Health Organization. (2019). ICD-11 Implementation or transition guide. 1-41. https://icd.who.int/docs/ICD-11%20Implementation
%20or%20Transition%20Guide_v105.pdf

CHAPTER 27
Alexander v. FedEx Ground Package Sys, Inc., 765 F.3d 981 (9th Cir.
2014). [Classic]
American Nurses Association. (2015a). Code of ethics for nursing with interpretive statements. American Nurses Publishing.
American Nurses Association. (2015b). Nursing: Scope and standards of practice (3rd ed.). American Nurses Publishing.
Hansen v. Caring Professionals, Inc., 676 N.E.2d 1349 (Ill. Ct.
App. 1997). [Classic]
Hitesman v. Bridgeway, Inc., 93 A.3d 306 (NJ 2014).
Internal Revenue Service. (2019a). Publication 15. Department of the Treasury.
Internal Revenue Service. (2019b). Publication 15-A. Department of the Treasury.
Internal Revenue Service. (2019c). Publication 17. Department of the Treasury.
Internal Revenue Service. (2019d). Publication 334. Department of the Treasury.
Internal Revenue Service. (2020a). Publication 5307. Department of the Treasury.
Internal Revenue Service. (2020b). Publication 505. Department of the Treasury.
Landin v. Healthsource Saginaw, Inc., 854 N.W.2d 152 (Mich. Ct.
App. 2014).
Murray, J. S. (2011). What every nurse needs to know about whistle-blowing. OR Nurse, 5(4), 39–42.
New Jersey Conscientious Employee Protection Act. (1986, as amended 1989, 1997, and 2005).
Office of the Inspector General, Department of Health & Human Ser- vices. (2011). Health care fraud and abuse control program annual report for fiscal year 2010. http://oig.hhs.gov/publications/docs
/hcfac/hcfacreport2010.pdf
Office of the Inspector General, Department of Health & Human Ser- vices. (2018). Health care fraud and abuse control program annual report for fiscal year 2017. http://oig.gov/publications/docs/hcfa
/FY2017-hcfac.pdf.
Office of the Inspector General, Department of Health & Human Services. (2019). Appalachian regional prescription opioid (ARPO) strike force takedown results in charges against 60 individuals,



including 53 medical professionals. http://oig.hhs.gov/newsroom
/media-materials/2019/arpo/
Office of the Inspector General, Department of Health & Human Ser- vices. (2020). Health care fraud and abuse control program annual report for fiscal year 2019. http://oig.hhs.gov/publications/docs
/hcfac/FY2019-hcfac.pdf
Trauma Nurses, Inc. v. N.J. Dep’t. of Labor, 576 A.2d 285 (N.J. Ct.
App. 1990). [Classic]
Vizcaino v. Microsoft Corporation, 120 F.3d 1006 (9th Cir. 1997). [Classic]
Washington County Memorial Hospital v. Sidebottom, 7 S.W.3d 542 (Mo. App. 1999). [Classic]

CHAPTER 28
Ali v. Community Health Care Plan, Inc., 801 A 2d 775 (Ct. 2002). Apex Hosiery Co. v. Leader, 310 U.S. 469 (1940).
Arizona v. Maricopa County Medical Society, 457 U.S. 332 (1982). Berdyck v. Shinde and H.R. Magruder Memorial Hospital, 613 NE
2d 1014 (1993).
California v. Texas, Docket 19-840
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2016). The health care fraud and abuse control program protects consumers and taxpayers by combating health care fraud. https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/fact- sheets/health-care-fraud-and-abuse-control-program-protects- consumers-and-taxpayers-combating-health-care
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2019). Medicare benefit policy manual Chapter 15—Covered medical and other health services. https://www.hhs.gov/guidance/sites/default/files/hhs-guidance- documents/38399_bp102c15_0.pdf
Chalmers-Francis v. Nelson, 6 Cal. 2d 402 (1936).
DeSanti, S. S., Farrell, J., & Feinstein, R. A. (2010, January 28). Letter from FTC staff to Kentucky Cabinet for Health and Family Services. http://www.ftc.gov/os/2010/02/100202kycomment.pdf
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, Pub. L. No.
93-406 (1974).
Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914, U.S.C. § 44–48.
Federal Trade Commission (2014). Policy perspectives: Competition and the regulation of advanced practice nurses. https://www.ftc.gov
/system/files/documents/reports/policy-perspectives-competition- regulation-advanced-practice-nurses/140307aprnpolicypaper.pdf
Fein v. Permanente Medical Group, 121 3d 135 (Cal. Ct. App. 1981).
Gilman, D. J., & Fairman, J. (2015). Antitrust and the future of nursing: Federal competition policy and the scope of practice. Health   Matrix,   24(1). https://scholarlycommons.law.case.edu/cgi
    /viewcontent.cgi?article=1007&context=healthmatrix Goldfarb v. Virginia State Bar, 421 U.S. 773 (1975).
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-191.
Hudspeth, R. (2009). Understanding discipline of nurse practitioners by boards of nursing. The Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 5(5), 365–371.

Institute of Medicine. (2010). The future of nursing: Leading change, advancing health. http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?record
_id=12956&page=R1
Iowa Medical Society v. Iowa Board of Nursing, 831 N.W.2d 826 (2013).
Kjervik, D., & Brous, E. A. (2010). Law and ethics in advanced practice nursing. Springer. [Classic]
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. (2019, June). Report to the Congress: Medicare and the health care delivery system. http:// www.medpac.gov/docs/default-source/reports/jun19_medpac_ reporttocongress_sec.pdf?sfvrsn=0
National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius, 567 U.S. 519 (2012).
North Carolina State Board of Dental Examiners v. Federal Trade Commission, 15-534, 547 U.S. (2015).
Northern Pacific Railway Co. v. United States, 356 U.S. 1, 4 (1958).
Nurse Midwifery Associates v. Hibbett, 918 F.2d 605 (1990). Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, Pub. L. No. 91-596. Oltz v. St. Peter’s Community Hospital, 19 F.3d 1312 (1994).
Oyeleye, O. A. (2019). Examining board discipline of nurse practi- tioners for medical records infractions. The Journal for Nurse Prac- titioners, 15(9), 613–517.
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010, Pub. L. No.
111-148 and 111-152.
Sermchief v. Gonzales, 660 S.W.2d 683 (Mo. Ct. 1983).
Spine Diagnostics Center of Baton Rouge Inc. v. Louisiana State Board of Nursing, CA 0813 (2008).
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, Pub. L. No. 115–97.
United States v. Topco Associates, 405 U.S. 596, 621 (1972).
Wilk v. American Medical Association, 895 F.2d 352 (1990).

CHAPTER 29
Alexander, C., & Bogossian, F. (2018). Midwives and clinical in- vestigation: A review of the literature. Women and Birth, 31(6), 442–452.
A.M. Best & Company. (2020). Guide to Best’s credit ratings. http:// www.ambest.com/ratings/index.html
American Academy of Nursing. (2017). Position statement: full prac- tice authority for advanced practice registered nurses is necessary to transform primary care. Nursing Outlook, 65(6): 761–765. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.outlook.2017.10.002
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2019). Certified registered nurse anesthetists’ fact sheet. AANA, August 8, 2019. https://www. aana.com/membership/become-a-crna/crna-fact-sheet#:~:text= CRNAs%20practice%20in%20every%20setting,management%20 specialists%3B %20and%20U.S.%20military%2C
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists. (2019, August 8).
Nurse  anesthetists’  fact  sheet. https://www.aana.com/membership
/become-a-crna/crna-fact-sheet
American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2020a, February). NP fact sheet. https://www.aanp.org/about/all-about-nps/np-fact-sheet



American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2020b, June 19). COVID-19 state emergency response: temporarily suspended & waived practice agreement requirements. AANP State Advocacy. https://www.aanp.org/advocacy/state/covid-19-state-emergency- response-temporarily-suspended-and-waived-practice-agreement- requirements
American Association of Nurse Practitioners. (2020c). State practice en- vironment. December, 20, 2019. https://www.aanp.org/advocacy
/state/state-practice-environment
American Association of Physician Assistants. (2019). What is a PA?
https://www.aapa.org/what-is-a-pa/
American College of Nurse-Midwives. (2019, May). Fact sheet: Essen- tial facts about midwives. http://www.midwife.org
Avraham, R., & Schanzenbach, M. (2017, February 23). Medical mal- practice reform. In R. Parisi (Ed.), Oxford handbook of law and economics (Vol. 2). http://ssm.com/abstract/2579640
Balestra, M. (2016). Liability in emergency departments and disci- plinary exposure for nurse practitioners. Journal for Nurse Practi- tioners, 12(2), 80–87. [Classic]
Balestra, M. (2017). Electronic health records: Patient care and ethical and legal implications for nurse practitioners, The Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 13(2), 105–111.
Barnett, S., Everett, J., & Schou, P. (2016, November). Federal require- ments for physician supervision of CRNAs [National Rural Health Association Policy Statement]. https://www.ruralhealthweb.org
/advocate/policy-documents
Borys, S., Zhu, L., & Hailu, J. (2019, September). NJ drug and alcohol treatment: Substance abuse overview, statewide, 2018. Department of Human Services, Division of Mental Health and Addiction Services, Office of Planning, Research, Evaluation, Prevention and Olmstead, Trenton, New Jersey.
Brock, D., Nicholson, J., & Hooker, R. (2017). Physician assistant and nurse practitioner malpractice trends. Medical Care Re- search and Review, 74(5), 613–624. https://journals.sagepub.com
/doi/10.1177/1077558716659022
Brom, H., Salsberry, P., & Graham, M. (2018). Leveraging health care reform to accelerate nurse practitioners full practice authority. Jour- nal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, 30(3), 120–130.
Brous, E. (2017). Reciprocal enforcement and other collateral issues with licensure discipline. Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 13(2), 118–122. [Classic]
Buerhaus, P. (2018, September). Nurse practitioners: A solution to Amer- ica’s health care crisis (pp. 1–30). American Enterprise Institute.
Buerhaus, P., DesRoches, C., Dittus, R., & Donelan, K. (2015). Prac- tice characteristics of primary care nurse practitioners and physi- cians. Nursing Outlook, 63(2), 144–153. https://www.ncbi.nlm
.nih.gov/pubmed/25261383
Buppert, C. J. (2015). Nurse practitioner’s business practice and legal guide (5th ed.). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Buppert, C. J. (2016). Is the collaborating physician responsible for nurse practitioner error? The Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 12(4), 284–285.

Buppert, C. J. (2018). Nurse practitioners business practice and legal guide (6th ed.). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Cadmus, E., de Cordova, P., & Weaver, S. (2020). Access to care in NJ: Making the case for modernizing legislation. Journal of Nursing Regulation, 11(1), 36–41. http://www.journalofnursingregulation
.com
Calio, V. (2018, June 18). Dearth of in-network psychiatrists high- lights NJ’s mental health gaps, NJ Biz.
Carman, K., Eibner, C., & Paddock, S. (2015). Trends in health care enrollment: 2013-2015. Health Affairs, 34(6), 1044–1048.
CM &F. (2020). Nurse practitioner: Get a quote. https://www.cmfgroup
   .com/professional-liability-insurance/nurse-practitioner-insurance/
CNA/NSO. (2012). Nurse practitioner 2012 liability update: A three- part approach. https://www.hpso.com/documents/Individuals
/Professional%20liability/NP_Claims _Study_2012.pdf [CNA/NSO are healthcare liability insurers] [Classic]
CNA/NSO. (2017). Nurse practitioner claims report 4th ed. A guide to identifying and addressing professional liability exposures. https://www.nso.com/Learning/Artifacts/Claim-Reports/Nurse- Practitioner-Claim-Report-4th-Edition-A-Guide-to-Identifying- and-Addressing-Professional-Liability-Exposures
Coakley, C. (2010). What if I am sued: Here’s what to expect from a malpractice suit. Advance for NPs and PAs. http://nurse- practitioners-and-physician-assistants.advanceweb.com/Features
/Articles/What-If-Im-Sued.aspx
Coffey,  S.  (2019).  Liability  and  risk  for  nurse  practitioners.
AACN Viewpoint,  41(3),  14–15. https://search.proquest.com
    /docview/2309268828?pq-origsite=gscholar&fromopenview=true CRICO. (2015). Malpractice risk in communication failure: 2015 an- nual benchmarking report, CRICO strategies, 2020. https://www
.rmf.harvard.edu/Malpractice-Data/Annual-Benchmark-Reports
/Risks-in-Communication-Failures
Daily Nurse. (2020, March 11). Florida nurse practitioners gain full practice authority. Daily Nurse: The Pulse of Nursing. https:// dailynurse.com/florida-grants-advanced-nps-full-practice-authority/
Dall, T., West, T., Chakrabarti, R., Reynolds, R., & Iacobucci, W. (2018). The complexities of physician supply and demand: projections from 2016 to 2030. HIS Markit Ltd. (Prepared for Association of American Medical Colleges [AAMC]). https://aamc-black.global
.ssl.fastly.net/production/media/filer_public/85/d7/85d7b689- f417-4ef0-97fbecc129836829/aamc_2018_workforce_projections_ update_april_11_2018.pdf
Dolan, C., & Farmer, L. (2016). Let the record speak: the power of the medical record. Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 12(2), 88–94.
Dulisse, B., & Cromwell, J. (2010). No harm found when nurse anesthetists work without supervision by physicians. Health Affairs, 29(8), 1469–1475. https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/full
/10.1377/hlthaff.2008.0966 [Classic]
Freeman, G. (2019, May 1). CRNAs manage risk through improved consent, documentation. Healthcare Risk Management.
Gardenier, D., ftomas, S., & O’Rourke, N. (2016). Will full practice authority mean higher malpractice premiums for NPs? The Journal



for Nurse Practitioners, 12(2), 78–79. https://www.npjournal.org
/article/S1555-4155(15)01110-1/abstract#pageBody
Geissel, C., & Palentino, J. (2006). Malpractice and risk manage- ment: A look at current issues and practices. Medscape Nurses, 8(2). http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/543977_2
Grant, P. D. (2018). Advanced practice nursing: Nursing malpractice/ negligence & liability. In D. Ballard & P. D. Grant (Eds.), Law for nursing leaders (2nd ed.). Springer.
Guardado, J. (2017). Medical liability claim frequency among U.S. physi- cians. American Medical Association, Policy Research Perspectives. Guardado, J. (2018). Medical professional liability insurance indemnity
payments, expenses and claim disposition, 2006–2015. American
Medical Association, Policy Research Perspectives.
Guidera, N., McCool, W., Hanlon, A., Schuiling, K., & Smith, A. (2012). Midwives and liability: Results from the 2009 nationwide survey of certified nurse-midwives and certified midwives. Journal of Midwifery & Women’s Health, 57, 345–352. [Classic]
Jordan, L. (2011). Studies support removing CRNA supervision rule to maximize workforce and assure access to care. AANA Journal, 79(2), 101–104.
Kachalia, A., Kaufman, S., Boothman, R., Anderson, S., Welch, K., Saint, S., & Rogers, M. (2010, August 17). Liability claims and costs before and after implementation of a medical error disclosure program. Annals of Internal Medicine. [Classic]
Kozhimannil, K., Henning-Smith, C., & Hung, P. (2016). fte prac- tice of midwifery in US rural hospitals. Journal of Midwifery & Women’s Health, 61(4), 411–418.
Laurant, M., Reeves, D., Hermens, R., Braspenning, J., Grol, R., & Sibbald, B. (2005). Substitution of doctors by nurses in primary care. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 18(2). https://ncbi
.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15846614 [Classic]
Liaison International. (2020). Clinical nurse specialist. https://bit
.ly/3guuy8L
Liao, C. J., Quraishi, J., & Jordan, L. (2015). Geographical imbalance of anesthesia providers and its impact on the uninsured and vulner- able populations. Nursing Economics, 33(5), 263–270.
Marsa, L. (2018, November 5). Labor pain: The OB-GYN shortage. Association of American Medical Colleges. https://www.aamc.org
/news-insights/labor-pains-ob-gyn-shortage
Martinez, M., Zammitti, E., & Cohen, R. (2018). Health insurance coverage: early release of estimates from the National Health Inter- view Survey, January–June 2018. U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics.
McMichael, B. (2019). Shifting liability with licensing: An empir- ical analysis of medical malpractice and scope of practice laws, Journal of Tort Law, 12(2), 212–253. https://doi.org/10.1515
/jtl-2019-0028
McMichael, B., Safriet, B., & Buerhaus, P. (2018). fte extra-regulatory effect of NP scope-of-practice laws on physician malpractice rates. Medical Care Research and Review, 75(3), 312–326. https://journals
.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1077558716686889

McMichael, B., Van Horn, R. L., & Viscusi, W. K. (2019). Sorry is never enough: How state apology laws fail to reduce medical mal- practice liability risk. Stanford Law Review, 71, 341–409.
Medical Learning Network. (2019, February). Medicare fraud and abuse: Prevent, detect & report (MLN Booklet). U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, CMS.
Mello, M. M. (2006). Medical malpractice: Impact of the crisis and ef- fect of state tort reforms. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Syn- thesis Project (Project No. 10). http://www.rwjf.org/en/library
/research/2006/05/medical-malpractice-impact-of-crisis.html [Classic]
Mello, M. M., Boothman, R. C., McDonald, T., Driver, J., Lembitz, A., Bouwmeester, D., & Gallagher, T. (2014a). Communication and resolution programs: fte challenges and lessons learned from six early adopters. Health Affairs, 33(1), 20–29.
Mello, M. M., Studdert, D., & Kachalia, A. (2014b). fte medical liability climate and prospects for reform [Special communication]. Journal of the American Medical Association, 312(20), 2146–2155.
Moore, C. (2017, March–April). Policies that restrict full utilization of nurse practitioners in primary care. Nursing Economics, 35(2), 75–79.
National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners. (2015). Position statement on malpractice insurance for nurse practitioners. Journal of Pediatric Health Care, 29(4), A11-A12. https://www.jpedhc.org
/article/S0891-5245(15)00153-4/fulltext
National Council Medical Director Institute. (2017, March 28). The psychiatric shortage: Causes and solutions. National Council for Be- havioral  Health. https://www.thenationalcouncil.org/wp-content
    /uploads/2017/03/Psychiatric-Shortage_National-Council-.pdf National Practitioner Data Bank. (2011). Annual report. Health Re-
sources and Services Administration, U.S. Department of Health
and   Human   Services.  http://www.npdb/hipdb.hrsa/gov/resources
/reports/2006NPDPAnnualReport.pdf
National Practitioner Data Bank. (2020). Resources. Health Resources and Services Administration, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. https://www.npdb.hrsa.gov/resources/aboutStatData.jsp
National Resident Matching Program. (2017). National resident match- ing program, results and data: 2017 main residency match. http:// www.nrmp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Main-Match- Results-and-Data-2017.pdf
Negrusa, B., Hogan, P., Warner, J., Schroeder, C., & Pang, B. (2016). Scope of practice laws and anesthesia complications; no measur- able impact of certified registered nurse anesthetist expanded scope of practice on anesthesia-related complications. Medical Care. http://journals.lww.com/lww-medicalcare/Abstract/publishahead
/Scope_of_Practice_Laws_and_Anesthesia.98905.aspx
NIDA. (2020). New Jersey: Opioid-involved deaths and related harms. https:// www.drugabuse.gov/drug-topics/opioids/opioid-summaries-by-state
/new-jersey-opioid-involved-deaths-related-harms
Nurses Service Organization. (2020). Nurse practitioner malpractice insurance: Get a quote. Nursing Service Organization. https://forms
.nso.com/mustela/site?productName=HCI#/QuickQuote



Poghosyan, L., Liu, J., & Forful, A. (2017). Nurse practitioners as pri- mary care providers with their own patient panels and organiza- tional structures: A cross-sectional study, International Journal of Nursing Studies, 72, 1–7. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science
/article/abs/pii/S0020748917301098?via%3Dihub
Pohlman, K. (2015). Why you need your own malpractice insurance.
American Nurse Today, 10(11), 1–3. https://www.americannursetoday
   .com/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/ant11-Malpractice-1023.pdf Ritter, A., Bowles, K., O’Sullivan, A., Canthor, M., & Fairman, J.
(2018). A policy analysis of legally required supervision of
nurse practitioners and other health professionals. Nursing Out- look,   66(2),   551–559. https://www.nursingoutlook.org/article
/S0029-6554(17)30646-2/fulltext
Schaffer, A., Jena, A., Seabury, S., Singh, H., Chalasani, V., & Kachalia,
A. (2017). Rates and characteristics of paid malpractice claims among physicians by specialty. JAMA Internal Medicine, 177(5), 710–718.
Singh, H. (2020). Adverse actions and malpractice reports, 2015-2020, National Practitioner Data Bank, analysis tool. https://www.npdb
.hrsa.gov/analysistool
Stainton, L. (2019, June 5). Controversial proposal advances to ease restrictions on APN Practice, NJ Spotlight. https://www.njspotlight
.com/2019/06/19-06-04-controversial-proposal-advances-to- expand-scope-of-practice-for-apns/
Stranger, K. (2016, December 5). Liability for non-employees: Beware apparent   authority.   Lexology. https://www.lexology.com/library
   /detail.aspx?g=896f8116-6e6c-4295-a16e-79612e72916a Tavernise, S., & Gebeloff, R. (2016, April 17). Immigrants, the poor
and minorities gain sharply under the Affordable Care Act. New
York Times.
Tolbert, J., Orgera, K., Singer, N., & Damico, A. (2019, December 13). Key facts about the uninsured population (Issue Brief ). Kaiser Family Foundation. https://www.kff.org/uninsured/issue-brief
/key-facts-about-the-uninsured-population/
Torre, C., & Drake, S. (2014, March/April). Maximizing access to health care in NJ: The case for APNs, Part II: A white paper. New Jersey State Nurses Association. http://psychapn.org/Resources/ Documents/WP%2011%20Final%20corrected%20PDF%20ctt.pdf
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2018, May). Occupational employ- ment and wages. Nurse Midwives. https://www.bls.gov/oes/2018
/may/oes291161.htm#nat
U.S. Census Bureau. (2018, March). Quick facts. https://www.census
.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/US/PST045219
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2013). Projecting the supply and demand for primary care practitioners through 2020. Health Resources and Services Administration, National Center for Health Workforce Analysis.
United Health Group. (2018). Addressing the nation’s primary care shortage: Advanced practice clinicians and innovative care delivery models (United Health Group, Primary Care Report).
Viscusi, W. K. (2019). Medical malpractice reform: what works and what doesn’t. Denver Law Review, 96(4), 775. https://scholarship
.law.vanderbilt.edu/faculty-publications/1104

Weinberg, M., & Kallerman, P. (2014, April). Full practice authority for nurse practitioners increases access and controls costs: Technical appen- dix (pp. 1–20). Bay Area Council Economic Institute.
Westrick, S., & Jacob, N. (2016). Disclosure of errors and apology: Law and ethics. The Journal for Nurse Practitioners, 12(2), 120–126. Wood, D. (2020). CRNAs in 2020: Practice update and trends staff care
[Locum Tenems Blog]. https://www.staffcare.com/physician-blogs
/crnas-in-2020-practice-updates-and-trends/#:~:text=So%20 far%2C%2017%20states%20have,South%20Dakota%2C%20 Washington%20and%20Wisconsin
Xiao, X., Lori, J. R. Siefert, K. A., Jacobson, P. D., & Ransom, S. B.(2008). Malpractice liability burden in midwifery: A survey of Michigan certified nurse-midwives. Journal of Midwifery and Wom- en’s Health, 53(1), 19–27.
Xue, Y., Ye, Z., Brewer, C., & Spetz, J. (2016, January–February). Impact of state nurse practitioner scope-of-practice regulation on health care delivery—systematic review. Nursing Outlook, 64(1), 71–85.
Young, A., Chaudhry, J., Pei, X., Arnhart, K., Dugan, M., & Snyder, G. (2017). Census of actively licensed physicians in the U.S., 2016. Journal of Medical Regulation, 103(2), 7–21.

CHAPTER 30
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2006). The essentials of doctoral education for advanced practiced nursing.
Andrews, M., Boyle, J., & Collins, J. (2019). Transcultural concepts in nursing case (8th ed.). Lippincott.
Aronowitz, T., Aronowitz, S., Marden-Small, J., & Boram, K. (2017). Using objective structured clinical examination (OSCE) as education in advanced practice nursing education. Journal of Pro- fessional Nursing, (33)2, 119–125. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016
/j.profnurs.2016.06.003
Beagan, B., & McDonald, M. (2005). Evidence-based practice of research ethics review. Healthlaw Review, 13(2–3), 62–68.
Benner, P. (2001). From novice to expert: Excellence and power in nursing practice (2nd ed.). Addison Wesley. [Classic]
Benner, P., Tanner, C. A., & Chesla, C. A. (1996). Expertise in nursing practice. Springer. [Classic]
Benner, P., Tanner, C., & Chesla, C. (2009). Entering the field: Ad- vanced beginner practice. In P. Benner, C. Tanner, & C. Chesla (Eds.), Expertise in nursing practice: Caring, clinical judgment, and ethics (2nd ed., pp. 25–60). Springer.
Buerhaus, P. (2011). Have nurse practitioners reached a tipping point? Interview of a panel of NP thought leaders. Nursing Economics, 28(5), 346–349.
Edmonson, C. (2010, September 30). Moral courage and the nurse leader. OJIN: The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 15(3), Man- uscript 5.
Gallagher, A. (2010). Moral distress and moral courage in everyday nurs- ing practice. OJIN: The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 16(2).
Guido, G. W. (2010). Legal and ethical issues in nursing (5th ed.).
Prentice Hall.



Hofmann, P. (2010). fte ethics of evidence-based management.
Healthcare Management, 25(1), 48–51.
Hoffmaster, B. (2006). “Real” ethics for “real” boys: Context and nar- rative. American Journal of Bioethics, 4(1), 40–41.
Husted, G. L., & Husted, J. H. (2008a). fte ethical experience of car- ing for vulnerable populations: fte symphonological approach. In
M. de Chesnay (Ed.), Caring for the vulnerable: Perspectives in nursing theory, practice, and research (2nd ed., pp. 103–113). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Husted, G. L., & Husted, J. H. (2008b). fte nurse as ethical shield: fte symphonological approach. Perioperative Advanced Practice Nurse, 3, 175–182.
Husted, J. H., & Husted, G. L. (1999). Agreement: fte origin of ethical action. Critical Care Nursing, 22(3), 12–18.
Husted, J. H., & Husted, G. L. (2015). Ethical decision making in nursing and health care: The symphonological approach (4th ed.). Springer.
Husted, J. H., Husted, G. L., Scotto, C. J., & Wolf, K. M. (2015).
Bioethical decision making in nursing (5th ed.). Springer.
Irwin, M. (2004). Application of symphonology theory in patient decision-making: Triangulation of quantitative and qualitative methods [Doctoral dissertation]. School of Nursing, Duquesne University.
Kalb, K. A., & O’Conner, S. (2007, July–August). Ethics education in advanced practice nursing: Respect for human dignity. Nursing Education Perspectives, 28(4), 196–202.
Kim, S. H. (2005). Confucian bioethics and cross-cultural consider- ations in health care decision making. Journal of Nursing Law, 10(3), 161–166.
Lachman, V. (2011). Strategies necessary for moral courage. OJIN: The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 15(3).
Marziali, E., Serafini, J., & McCleary, L. (2005). A systematic review of practice standards and research ethics in technology-based home health care intervention programs for older adults. Journal of Aging and Health, 17(6), 679–696. https://doi.org/10.1177
/0898264305281100

McKeon, R. (Ed.). (1941). The basic works of Aristotle. Random House. Miller, R. (2005). Moral courage: Definition and development. Ethics
Resource Center.
Murray, J. (2011). Moral courage in health care. OJIN: The Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 15(3).
Parker, B., & Greach, C. (2018). Authentic practice environments to support undergraduate nursing students’ readiness for hospital placements. A new model of practice in an on campus simulated hospital and health service. Nurse Education in Practice, 33, 47–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nepr.2018.08.012
Raymond, J., & Trop, I. (2007). fte ethics of practice in the era of evidence-based radiology. Radiology, 244(3), 643–649.
Repenshek, M. (2007). Moral distress: Inability to act or discomfort with moral subjectivity? Nursing Ethics, 16(6), 734–742.
Robinson, B. K., & Dearmon, V. (2013). Evidence-based nursing education: Effective use of instructional design and simulated learning environments to enhance knowledge transfer in under- graduate nursing students. Journal of Professional Nursing, 29, 203–209.
Scotto, C. (2018). Symphonological bioethical theory. In M. R. Alli- gold (Ed.), Nursing theorists and their work (9th ed.). Mosby.
Sekerka, L., & Bagozzi, R. (2007). Moral courage in the workplace: Moving to and from the desire and decision to act. Business Ethics: A European Review, 16(2), 132–149.
Taylor, C., Lillis, C., LeMone, P., & Lynn, P. (2019). Fundamentals of nursing: The art and science of nursing care (9th ed.). Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Walsh, M., & Bernhard, L. (2011). Selected theories and models for advanced practice nursing. In J. Stanley (Ed.), Advanced practice nursing: Emphasizing common roles (5th ed., pp. 89–114). F.A. Davis.
Zoucha, R., & Husted, G. L. (2000). fte ethical dimensions of deliv- ering culturally congruent nursing and health care. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 1(3), 325–340.






































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































