HEALTH POLICY
Increasing Access to Health Care
by Implementing a Consensus Model
for Advanced Practice Registered
Nurse Practice
Rachel Mack, PhD, FNP
ABSTRACT
Advanced practice registered nurses (APRNs) are expert clinicians who manage the
patient’s overall care. The APRN Consensus Work Group and the National Council
of State Boards of Nursing APRN Advisory Committee developed a Consensus
Model to standardize APRN regulations and licensing. This model focuses on 4 roles:
certiﬁed registered nurse anesthetist, certiﬁed nurse-midwife, clinical nurse specialist,
andcertiﬁednursepractitioner.Twenty-threestateshaveimplementedthisConsensus
Model. This article focuses on increasing awareness for implementation of the APRN
Consensus Model. Eliminating practice barriers will standardize the regulatory process
forAPRNs,increasestate-to-statepracticemobility,andincreaseaccesstoAPRNcare
nationwide.
Keywords: Consensus Model, regulatory practice, advanced practice registered nurse
 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
N
ursing has a long history that dates back to
theinitialwritingsofFlorenceNightingale.
The role of the advanced practice registered nurse (APRN) began in the 19th centuryduring the Civil War due to a shortage of suitableanesthetists and the reluctance of physicians to provide anesthetics. Nurses were then encouraged totake on this role, and this shortage of anesthetistsassisted in the development of the role of the registered nurse anesthetist.1The next APRN role to develop was that of theclinical nurse specialist, which also emerged duringthe 19th century when the term specialists in nursingwas used in the ﬁrst article published in the ﬁrst issueof the American Journal of Nursing, “Specialistsin Nursing.”2Midwives were the next APRNs who beganpracticing in the United States in the early 20thcenturywithhomedeliveries.Theevolutionofnursemidwifery evolved into hospital deliveries, and thesemidwifes assisted with the post-War baby boom andwereacknowledged forimproving thequalityofcarein hospitals.3The development of the APRN role, the nursepractitioner (NP), began in the mid-20th centuryamid great opposition in an environment ofinformal training, with no credentialing processes,and an increasing sophistication of medical care.NPs began responding to these challenges andbegan deﬁning and legitimizing the role inthe 1970s.4History identiﬁes that APRNs have beenproviding care in primary, acute, and specialty healthcare settings since the 19th century.1-3 These expertclinicians order, perform, and interpret diagnostictests,diagnoseandtreatacuteandchronicconditions,prescribe medications and treatments, and focus onhealth promotion and disease prevention whilemanaging the patient’s overall care. The scope ofpractice for APRNs differs across the US, with 23states currently allowing APRNs to practiceautonomously and the remaining states requiringwww.npjournal.org The Journal for Nurse Practitioners - JNP 419some degree of supervision or collaboration with a
physician.
5
A consensus model was developed jointly by the
APRN Consensus Work Group, consisting of 24
organizations, and the National Council of State
Boards of Nursing APRN Advisory Committee to
assist in standardizing the regulations for APRN
education and licensure. This APRN model of
regulation focuses on 4 speciﬁc roles: certiﬁed registered nurse anesthetist, certiﬁed nurse-midwife,clinical nurse specialist, and certiﬁed NP. This modelhasthepotentialtoincreasestate-to-statemobilityforpractice and increase access to APRN care nationwide.6 The National Governors Association Report,the Federal Trade Commission Policy paper, and theAmerican Hospital Association “EnvironmentalScan” are just a few entities that support APRNs’practiceatthemaximumlevel,knowingthatthiswillremove barriers and improve access to health care inmany rural and underserved communities.7-10Currently, 23 states have successfully implementedthis consensus model, which, in turn, has eliminatedpractice barriers for APRNs and increased access topatient care, especially in rural and underservedcommunities.11 The focus of this discussion article isto increase awareness and implementation of theConsensus Model for APRN Regulation.ADVANCED PRACTICE REGISTERED NURSEAPRNs have been treating patients in a variety ofsettings for decades. These clinicians provide clinicalexpertise in diagnosing and treating health conditionswith a focus on disease prevention and health management and a comprehensive approach to healthcare.12 APRNs must complete a master’s or doctoralprogramandundergoarigorousnationalcertiﬁcationexamination to be recognized as health careproviders. APRNs participate in periodic peerreview, clinical outcome evaluations, health careforums, and clinical research and must adhere to acode for ethical practices. Participation in selfdirected learning and professional development isrequired to maintain clinical competency andlicensure.12The scope of practice for APRNs varies by stateand includes autonomous, collaborative, andsupervised practice. Areas for APRN practice includefamily/individual across the lifespan, adultgerontology, pediatrics, neonatal, women’s health/genderrelated,andpsych/mentalhealth.APRNscanalso practice in a variety of specialty areas, includingallergy and immunology, cardiovascular, dermatology, emergency, endocrinology, gastroenterology,hematology and oncology, neurology, occupationalhealth, orthopedics, pulmonology, sports medicine,and urology.12APRNs have a unique approach to health care,because it focuses on the health and well-being ofthe whole person and includes the family andsurrounding environment. The care provided focuseson health promotion, disease prevention, and healtheducation. APRNs assist in guiding the patient inmakingsmarterhealth and lifestylechoices, which,inturn, can lower the patient’s out-of-pocket costs.12Patients who see an APRN as their primary careprovider have been shown to have fewer emergencydepartment visits, shorter hospital stays, and lowermedication costs.12 Patients also report an extremelyhigh level of satisfaction with the care that theyreceive from their APRN. These skilled practitionersalso help contribute to reducing the primary careshortage by offering high-quality, cost-effective,patient-centered health care.12 APRNs are importantin the health care environment by being health careproviders who also serve as mentors, educators,researchers, and administrators. The continuedinvolvement of these practitioners in professionalorganizations and their participation in health policyhas helped to advance the role of the APRN andensure that professional standards are maintained.DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS GRANTS FULLPRACTICE AUTHORITYIn May 2016, the Department of Veterans Affairsannounced that it was adjusting current regulationsfor APRNs, granting full practice authority to NPs,nurse-midwives, and clinical nurse specialists. Thischange allows these expert clinicians to practice tothe full extent of their education, training, and certiﬁcation regardless of state restrictions that may limitfull practice authority. Making this change will allowtheses clinicians to provide timely, efﬁcient, effective,The Journal for Nurse Practitioners - JNP Volume 14, Issue 5, May 2018420and safe primary care, which will beneﬁt veterans
receiving health care through this system. However,
speciﬁc state laws on narcotic prescribing will still be
in place for APRNs and clinical nurse specialists
working in the Veterans Affairs system.
13
ORGANIZATIONAL VIEWS ON IMPROVING ACCESS TO
HEALTH CARE
The Consensus Model for APRN Regulation was
developed by the APRN Consensus Work Group
and the National Council of State Boards of Nursing
APRN Advisory Committee and was released in July
2008. It was developed as an effort to standardize
APRN regulations, which includes education,
accreditation, certiﬁcation, and licensure. The model
has been endorsed by 48 organizations that represent
a variety of nursing professionals and regulatory
groups.
14 Each aspect of the model will standardize
the regulatory process for APRNs, increasing stateto-state mobility for practicing, and will provide anincreased access to APRN care nationwide. Thisincreased access to care was considered critical afterthe introduction of the Affordable Care Act in 2010,which expanded health care coverage and providedhealth insurance to many through the marketplacesand expanded Medicaid coverage, with better accessto primary care, chronic care, and additional preventive services.8 The Consensus Model wasdesigned to create unity in the standards of practicefor APRNs across the US and will increase access tohealth care.14The 2011 Institute of Medicine report, “TheFuture of Nursing: Leading Change and AdvancingHealth”,15 identiﬁed the importance of removingpractice barriers for APRNs across the US. Thisreport emphasized the importance of removing statelaws, regulations, and policies that preclude APRNsfrom practicing to the full scope of practice in whichthey have been educated to provide. Table 1 listsstates by practice environment types. A total of 23states have since removed the practice barriers andimplemented the Consensus Model to allow APRNsfull practice authority, but more than half of theremaining states have not implemented this model,which means there is much more work that needs tobe done to fully implement the model.Barriers to practice ultimately affect the patientand leave gaps in health care treatments that manyAPRNs can provide.11 States that require APRNsupervision may include in-person monthlymeetings with the supervising physician, restrictionson medication prescribing, restrictions forordering medical equipment, and limited servicesprovided to skilled nursing facilities. Theserestrictions affect APRN and physician time toprovide patient care, increase cost burdens toAPRNs, and increase problems for patients, whichinclude time, costs, and accessing care, especiallyin rural areas.11Table 1.States by Practice Typea,bFull Practice Reduced RestrictedAlaska Alabama CaliforniaArizona Arkansas FloridaColorado Delaware GeorgiaConnecticut Illinois MassachusettsDistrict of Columbia Indiana MichiganHawaii Kansas MissouriIdaho Kentucky North CarolinaIowa Louisiana OklahomaMaine Mississippi South CarolinaMaryland New Jersey TennesseeMinnesota New York TexasMontana Ohio VirginiaNebraska PennsylvaniaNevada UtahNew Hampshire West VirginiaNew Mexico WisconsinNorth DakotaOregonRhode IslandSouth DakotaVermontWashingtonWyominga American Association of Nurse Practitioners.5b There are 23 states with full practice authority, 16 states with reduced practiceauthority, and 12 states with restricted practice authority.www.npjournal.org The Journal for Nurse Practitioners - JNP 421The 2012 National Governors Association report,
“The Role of the Nurse Practitioner in Meeting
Increasing Demand for Primary Care,”
10 includes an
extensive literature review regarding the safety and
quality of care that APRNs provide. The report
identiﬁes no concerns regarding the safety or quality
of care provided by APRNs and recommends that all
states amend the scope of practice restrictions and
modify reimbursement policies to remove barriers to
APRNpracticeandcare.Thereportsuggeststhatthe
expanded use of APRNs has the potential to increase
access to health care, speciﬁcally in underserved
communities.
8,10
The 2012 American Hospital Association “Environmental Scan” examined a substantial amount ofresearch that studied the quality of care provided byNPs and physician assistants who practice in primarycare.7 It showed that these clinicians perform as wellasphysiciansonimportantclinicaloutcomemeasures,such as mortality, improvement in pathologiccondition, symptom reduction, health status, andfunctional status. Unifying the scope of practice forthese clinicians will improve access to health care inunderserved communities.7The March 2014 Federal Trade Commissionpolicy paper, “Competition and the Regulation ofAdvanced Practice Nurses,” determined thatdecades of research and the experience demonstrated by APRNs identiﬁed that safe and effectivecare is provided.9 This policy paper also found thatmandatory physician supervision and collaborativepractice agreements are not justiﬁed by health orsafety concerns, but lead to higher costs, lessinnovation, reduced quality of care, anddecreased access to services. It concluded thatremoving barriers to APRN practice is goodcompetition and will increase access to healthcare services.9In November 2017, the National League forNursing (NLN) responded to the American MedicalAssociation Resolution 214, which opposed anexpanding role for APRNs practicing in states with amultistate compact.16 The NLN voiced extremeconcerns about the language that was used in theAmerican Medical Association’s resolution implyingthat APRNs are not educated to provide primarycare. The NLN responded that APRNs are educatedin providing primary care to the full scope of theireducation and practice. The NLN supports themultistate compact, which will expand the APRNrole in many states, increase access to health care,and increase collaboration between health careproviders.16BARRIERS TO IMPLEMENTATIONThe LACE (licensure, accreditation, certiﬁcation,education) APRN Network was developed after thecompletion of the Consensus Model in 2008. Thisnetwork consists of 28 organizations that representAPRN licensure, accreditation, certiﬁcation, andeducation. The purpose of the LACE Network was,and is, to provide a transparent communicationmechanism to support and facilitate the implementation of the Consensus Model.17The American Nurses Credentialing Center supports the Consensus Model for APRN Regulation.18This model was created in an attempt to align thelicensure, accreditation, certiﬁcation, and educationof APRNs across the US. The American NursesCredentialing Center anticipates that this model willcreate consistency and clarity, which will beneﬁtAPRNs and patients by increasing access to healthcare in many rural and underserved areas in the US.Developing and implementing this model will allowAPRNs to practice to the full extent of theireducation and licensure and will decrease barriers topractice by increasing mobility across state lines.18The American Association of Nurse Practitioners(AANP) participated in the process of developing theConsensusModelforAPRNRegulation.ThemodeldeﬁnedAPRNpractice,titles,andspecialtiesandalsodescribed the relationship between licensure,accreditation, certiﬁcation, and education. TheAANP supports the implementation of theConsensus Model and unifying practice for APRNsacross the US, which will increase access to care formany patients.12APRNs have lobbied for years for independentor, in other terms, autonomous practice. The issuehas become increasingly critical in light of the healthcare reform movement and the lack of universallyaffordable, accessible, and high-quality health care.The Journal for Nurse Practitioners - JNP Volume 14, Issue 5, May 2018422Allowing APRNs to bill under their own names,
engage in joint ownership of primary care practices,
begin to establish their own independent primary
care practices, and practice to their fullest scope of
practice is an integral component to increasing access
to health care.
19
Interviews conducted with APRNs (unpublished
data) identiﬁed barriers to access of health care and
full practice authority. One participant discussed
“States should be equal. We cannot deliver different
quality care in other states based only on the appropriateness of state-to-state rules. Nurse practitionerscan practice and treat. . . in every state, regardless ofstate affairs, NPs should be able to practice to theirfull scope, full education, in every state.”Another participant stated, “I also think there isnot a basis in this state (Oklahoma) to change theregulations.WearealltrainedtobeNPs,alleducatedthe same, NPs, PA, DOs, MDs. . . where is thedifferenceinregulationcomingfrom?WhyisitthatIcan onlyprescribeScheduleII medicationsthere,andhere I can only prescribe schedule III, you have fullpractice authority over there, but I might go somewhere else and can’t even prescribe a narcotic. It isfrustrating . . . obviously we have the training, NPshave the training, to do what needs to be done to ﬁllthose gaps and those federal regulations make it alittle funky, state regulations too. It always goes backto regulations.”Oneparticipantdiscussed, “Statesshouldbeequal.We can’t deliver different quality care in other statesbased only on the appropriateness of state-to-staterules. . . regardless of state affairs, NPs should be ableto practice to their full scope, full education, inevery state.”Several barriers have been identiﬁed for statestrying to implement the Consensus Model, includingorganizational bylaws, legislative rulings, insurancepolicies, and reimbursement issues. Legislative barriersareatthetopofthelistformanystatesacrosstheUS ﬁghting for the right of full practice authority forAPRNs using the Consensus Model. These legislative barriers require time, attention, ﬁnancialresources, and legal actions that provide no guaranteeof a successful outcome.Reimbursement is another area of contingency,because APRNs are reimbursed by Medicare andMedicaid at 85% of that of a physician. This reduction in reimbursement began with the Budget Balance Act of 1997, which creates a signiﬁcant barrier.This makes it ﬁscally unattractive to allow APRNs topractice without physician oversight and partnershipfor many states. Full billing authority is an essentialcomponent for actualizing state legislative full practice authority.20,21IMPORTANCE OF POLITICAL ENGAGEMENT FORADVANCING APRN PRACTICEPolitical activism is an important role in whichAPRNs should be involved, because this can have apositive effect on patient access to care, scope ofpractice, and reimbursement. Without this politicalinvolvement, patients and families will suffer becausemany physicians are still against expanding the scopeof practice for APRNs. Most physicians are unawareof, or choose to ignore, the research that demonstrates that APRNs provide the same, if not better,care for patients and families. It is extremely important for APRNs to become active participants andadvocates for their profession and to educate othersabout the beneﬁts of nurse practitioner regulationand the Consensus Model, because these cliniciansprovide high-quality health care, high levels of patient satisfaction, more affordable care, and would beable to increase access to care across the US. Promoting political activism in this profession is important for APRNs and educational institutions, becausethis is the most effective method to create change inthe ever-evolving arena of health care.22APRNs can be active political participants in theirrespective states to implement the Consensus Modelby circulating information throughout their owninstitutions and communities.These participants caninitiate communication through presentations, faceto-face meetings, emails, and discussion groups. Targeted groups, individuals, and stakeholders should beidentiﬁed, whichcan include hospital associations,advisory committees, boards of nursing, legal representatives, legislators, and insurers. Presentationsshouldbefocusedon therole ofAPRNsand waystointegrate these key providers throughout the healthcare system. Having APRN representation on healthcareerelatedcommitteesinstitutionallyandatthestatelevel is also important, as is joining efforts with thewww.npjournal.org The Journal for Nurse Practitioners - JNP 423American Nurses Association’s Nurses on Boards
Coalition. APRNs should also develop professional
work groups and alliances to unify and promote
communication and action. These providers also
need to educate the public about the role of the
APRN through mediaoutlets and community
organizations, which can include local newspapers,
radio interviews, screen savers for computers in a
variety of organizations, and posting information on
websites.
20
CONCLUSION
It is important for all supporting entities, APRNs,
and educational programs to continue working
toward implementing and promoting the Consensus
Model for APRN Regulation across the US. This
model will eliminate practice barriers and will
increase access to health care to patients in all areas,
especially rural and underserved communities.
APRNs are already ordering, performing, and
interpreting diagnostic tests, diagnosing and treating
acute and chronic conditions, prescribing
medications and treatments, and focusing on health
promotion and disease prevention while managing
the patient’s overall care. Further eliminating
practice barriers will only continue to assist in
improving the health of many patients across
the US.
20
References
1. Ray WT, Desai SP. The history of the nurse anesthesia profession. J Clin
Anesth. 2016;30:51-58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinane.2015.11.005.
2. Gordon JM, Lorilla JD, LehmanCA. The role of the clinicalnurse specialist in
the future of health care in the United States. Periop Nursing Clinics.
2012;7(3):343-353. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpen.2012.06.006.
3. Rooks JP. The history of midwifery. Our Bodies, Ourselves. Revised May 22,
2014. https://www.ourbodiesourselves.org/health-info/history-of-midwifery/.
Accessed December 7, 2017.
4. O’Brien JM. How nurse practitioners obtained provider status: lessons for
pharmacists. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2003;60(22):2301-2307.
5. American Association of Nurse Practitioners. State Practice Environment,
2012-2018. https://www.aanp.org/education/66-legislation-regulation/state
-practice-environment/1380-state-practice-by-type. Accessed December 7,
2017.
6. NationalCouncilofStateBoardsof NursingAdvisoryCommittee.Consensus
Model for APRN Regulation: licensure, accreditation, certiﬁcation, and
education. Published July 7, 2008. https://www.ncsbn.org/Consensus_Model
_for_APRN_Regulation_July_2008.pdf. Accessed December 7, 2017.
7. American Hospital Association. 2012 AHA Environmental Scan. 2011.
Hospitals & Health Networks, 85(9), 12. Preceding 42.
8. Brassard A. Overview and summary: APRN roles: opportunities and
challengesforpracticeandeducation. OnlineJIssuesNurs. 2014;19(2).entire
issue, https://doi.org/10.3912/OJIN.V0119N002ManOS.
9. Federal Trade Commission. Policy perspectives: competition and the
regulationofadvancedpracticenurses[PolicyPaper].PublishedMarch2014.
https://www.ftc.gov/system/ﬁles/documents/reports/policy-perspectives
-competition-regulation-advanced-practice-nurses/140307aprnpolicypaper
.pdf. Accessed December 7, 2017.
10. National Governors Association. The role of nurse practitioners in meeting
increased demands for primary care. Published December 20, 2012. https://
www.nga.org/cms/home/nga-center-for-best-practices/center-publications/
page-health-publications/col2-content/main-content-list/the-role-of-nurse
-practitioners.html. Accessed December 7, 2017.
11. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Charting Nursing’s Future. The case for
removing barriers to APRN practice. Published March 2017. https://
campaignforaction.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/CNF30-online-brief.pdf.
Accessed December 7, 2017.
12. American Association of Nurse Practitioners. National certiﬁcation
expectations for entry level NPs; 2017. https://www.aanp.org/education/
student-resource-center/starting-your-career/9-education/1060-certiﬁcation
-for-entry-level-nps. Accessed December 7, 2017.
13. United States Department of Veterans Affairs. VA grants full practice
authority to advance practice registered nurses. Published December 14,
2016. https://www.va.gov/opa/pressrel/pressrelease.cfm?id¼2847. Accessed
December 7, 2017.
14. Rounds LR, Zych JJ, Mallary LL. The consensus model for regulation of
APRNs: implications for nurse practitioners. J Am Assoc Nurse Pract.
2013;25(4):180-185. https://doi.org/10.111/j.1745-7599.2012.00812.x.
15. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation Initiative on the Future of Nursing, at the Institute of Medicine.
TheFuture of Nursing:LeadingChange,AdvancingHealth.Washington(DC):
National Academies Press (US); 2011.
16. National League for Nursing. The National League for Nursing decries AMA
Resolution 214 opposing expanded practice role for advanced practice
registered nurses outlined in multi-state compact. Published November 22,
2017. http://www.nln.org/newsroom/news-releases/news-release/2017/11/22/
the-national-league-for-nursing-decries-ama-resolution-214-opposing
-expanded-practice-role-for-advanced-practice-registered-nurses-outlined-in
-multi-state-compact. Accessed December 7, 2017.
17. LACE APRN Network. LACE network public discussion board; 2017. http://
login.icohere.com/public/topics.cfm?cseq¼935&CFID¼58196363&CFTOKE
N¼94148392. Accessed December 7, 2017.
18. American Nurses Credentialing Center. FAQ: consensus model for APRN
regulation; 2017. http://www.nursecredentialing.org/APRN-FAQ.aspx#Q1.
Accessed December 7, 2017.
19. Tolman DR. Breaking away: the ethical case for nurse practitioner
independence. Am J Nurse Pract. 2011;15(7/8):38-46.
20. Lofgren MA, Berends SK, Reyes J, et al. Scope of practice barriers for
advanced practice registered nurses: a state task force to minimize barriers.
J Nurse Admin. 2017;47(9):465-469. https://doi.org/10.1097/NNA.
0000000000000515.
21. Melby C. Physician and nurse reimbursement. Online J Issues Nurs.
1998;3(1). manuscript 3, www.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/
ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN/TableofContents/Vol31998/
No1June1998/PhysicianandNurseReimbursement.aspx.
22. American Nurse Practitioner Foundation. Nurse practitioners and political
engagement: ﬁndings from a nurse practitioner advanced practice focus
group and national online survey. Published February 2015. http://anp
-foundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/Nurse_Practitioners_and
_Political_Engagement_Report.pdf. Accessed December 7, 2017.
Rachel Mack, PhD, FNP is assistant professor of nursing,
Frontier Nursing University, Hyden, KY. In compliance with
national ethical guidelines the author reports no relationships with
business or industry that would pose a conﬂict of interest.
1555-4155/18/$ see front matter
© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nurpra.2018.02.008
The Journal for Nurse Practitioners - JNP Volume 14, Issue 5, May 2018
424
